---
title: "The Cell and the Organism"
chapter: 4
---

Summary: The cell is the second fundamental structure of the universe. It is possible that both before and after the origin of atoms and cells, as well as in between, other structures arose in the course of cosmic Evolution. If so, they have passed away, and we have now only these two permanent survivals which we can scrutinise for clues as to the basic character of the universe. In the study of animate nature Evolution or Organic Descent has till recently attracted most attention. But more recently the study of the structure and functions of the cell has come rapidly to the front and now probably forms the principal centre of interest in Biology. That al plants and animals consist of cells; that cells contain certain peculiar bodies called nuclei; that all higher organisms arise from cell-fusions in which the nuclei play a prominent part--all these facts have been discovered only in comparatively recent years; and our knowledge of cells is therefore still in its earliest stage. But Cytology is now, with a much-improved technique of research, making rapid strides, and great discoveries are confidently looked forward to.

Besides the nucleus the cell consists principally of a rapidly circulating jelly-like fluid, enclosed in a more or less well-marked wall or membrane of a permeable character; and the fluid contains numerous exceedingly complex chemical compounds in solution or in the colloid state. The structure of a cell is therefore most complex, and in fact comparatively little is yet definitely known about it. Its functions are even more mysterious, for they include practically all the activities which we see in developed organisms--birth, growth, breathing, feeding, digestion, self-healing, reproduction and" death. Its most distinctive function is metabolism, which means that it thoroughly alters and transforms all food materials before assimilating them; and all its apparently physical activities are of this transformative metabolic character instead of being simple mechanical operations. It appears to form complex chemical compounds, called enzymes, which in their colloid state enable these distinctive radical transformations to be effected. The apparently simple physical processes such as osmosis, etc. in the cell are really much more complicated, as they are effected through enzyme action, which is a physico-chemical mechanism distinctive of organisms. The laboratory attempts to repeat organic processes throw, therefore, little. light on the exact nature of these processes.

The origin of the cell is the origin of life and is still a profound mystery. However, the reproduction of cells seems to admit us to the inner secrets of life, and the cell-divisions which precede cell fusions in reproduction have an extraordinary semblance to electrical situations, and seem somehow to connect the electrical structure of the atom with a possible electrical origin of the cell. It is now, however, impossible to follow up this clear semblance further, as the original electrical processes (if any) have probably become overlaid* with other developments which have transformed them.

Judging from the action of sunlight in the growth of plants it is not improbable that the cell of life arose when the sun was both warmer and richer in chemically active rays, and when the waters of the earth still contained many substances in solution and colloid' dispersal. The adhesion of cells to each other would account for the origin and development of multi-cellular organisms; and the divisions of cells, which we now see in growth and reproduction, may have arisen originally from the breakdown of cells or groups which had become too complex to be stable.

The reproduction of plants and animals, including the preparatory reduction division of the sexual cells, follows largely the same plan; and it is therefore probable that this wonderful organic mechanism was evolved before the bifurcation of life into the plant and animal forms took place, and thus dates back to the early beginnings of life on this globe. The plant type arose from its dependence for food on air and earth, which was consistent with fixed positions; while animals, needing organic foods, required mobility, and in consequence developed a motor system, with a nervous system to work it, and ultimately a brain to co-ordinate and control both.

The cell differs from the atom or molecule in its far greater complexity of structure and function, in the differentiation and specialisation of its parts and organs, and in the system of co-operation among all its parts which make them function for the whole. This co-operative system exists not only in the single cell but among the multitudinous cells of organisms. The system of organic regulation and co-ordination among an indefinitely large number of parts which makes all the parts function together for certain purposes is a great advance on the system of physical equilibrium in atoms and compounds, and is yet quite distinct from the control which, at a later stage of Evolution, Mind comes to exercise in animals and humans. Mind as we know it should therefore not be ascribed to the cell or the lower organisms; but organic regulation seems on that lower level to be even more effective than Mind is at a later stage.

This organic regulation and synthesis of functions is seen not only in all the ordinary functions of organism, but more especially in their capacity for self-restoration in case of mutilation. In such phenomena there seems to be something more in actual operation than merely the parts; the parts appear to play a common part and to carry out some common purpose or to act for the common wellbeing. They seem to respond to some central pressure. There seems to be a central regulator. We have seen a factor in matter making for structure; we now see a factor in organism making for central regulation and co-ordination of all parts. We are evidently in the presence of some inner factor in Evolution which requires identification and description. That will be attempted in the next chapter.

THE atom and the cell are the two fundamental structures in the universe that we at present know of--the atom being the unit of the world of matter, the cell the unit of the world of life. In the last chapter we considered the structure of the atom and showed how the external properties of the atom were the expression and resultant of its internal energies and their structural grouping inside the atom. We saw the atom as a little complex world of its own, underlying the outward properties as well as the field of that little world. We now pass on to Consider the vastly more complicated little world of the cell and its field. In the science of life the two most significant conceptions are Evolution and the Cell, the one being the unit structure and the other the general character and trend of the activities or functions of life. Round the investigation and development of these two governing conceptions most of the progress and interest in biological science since the middle of the nineteenth century has centred; and the results hitherto obtained have been most important, and practically revolutionary for our entire world-conception. And the end is by no means in sight yet. In the first chapter we saw that there were still deep-seated misunderstandings of the nature of Evolution, and that a proper appreciation of Evolution would mean a recasting not only of biological concepts but also, and above all, of our concept of matter. Let us now turn to the cell as the other and no doubt the real governing factor of the situation of life, and see what light it throws on the nature and concept of life.

A few introductory words in regard to the history of our knowledge of the cell may not be out of place here. It will be seen that accurate information even of what little we do know about the cell is of very recent date, and that we are only at the beginning of what may yet prove a great story.

In the second half of the seventeenth century Robert Hooke observed with the crude microscope then in use that cork and other vegetable substances had a vesicular appearance, and he called the apparent cavities " cells. “ A few years later Grew and Malpighi independently observed in plant tissues these same cavities filled with fluid and surrounded with firm walls, as well as what appeared to them to be tubes likewise with walls and filled with fluid. Towards the end of the eighteenth century Treviranus showed that these tubes were cells placed in a row and elongated in the direction of the row and with the partitions between them lost. Then followed in 1831 Robert Brown's great discovery of the nucleus in the cell in plants, and in 1838 Schleiden's elucidation of the great part which the cell with its nucleus plays in the structure of plants, and shortly afterwards the application by Schwann of the new knowledge of the cell to the structure of animals also. Both Schleiden and Schwann attached great importance to the cell wall and looked upon the cells as having crystallised out of some mother substance. The contents of the cells Schleiden called vaguely “vegetable slime"; and it was not till about the middle of the nineteenth century that the great, German biologist von Mohl correctly explained the contents of both vegetable and animal cells as nucleated masses of what he called " protoplasm/' which was not a chemical crystallisation from other substances, but always came into being as the offspring or daughter cells from other pre-existing cells. Hence arose the formula: omnis cellula e cellula. This paved the way to the correct understanding of sexual fertilisation as the union of two cells, the discovery of cell divisions, and the part played by the nucleus with its chromosomes in these divisions, and of the origin of embryos through repeated cell-divisions. And finally a concentrated effort was made by many investigators in many countries to discover in cell-divisions and fusions, and especially in the part played by the nucleus, the physical mechanism of heredity. During this century the re-discovery of Mendelism by De Vries and others, and the rise of the new science of Genetics, have led to redoubled efforts to find the explanation of the many peculiar phenomena of heredity in an analysis of the parts played by the nucleus and the other elements in the protoplasm of the cell, and at present experimental Cytology is being vigorously prosecuted with numerous improved methods and appliances.

Let us now consider the structure of the cell and the part it plays in organisms. I shall only summarise its most general and outstanding features, with a view to illustrating the considerations and speculations which will be advanced later. I am trying to find concepts for vital phenomena, which will be coherent not only with those phenomena but also with wider aspects of knowledge and reality, and a reference to the scientific facts and results is therefore necessary. The time is past when a philosophy of life could be evolved without a knowledge of or reference to the scientific facts and view-points.

All plants and animals consist of cells, these cells being again usually composed of various chemical substances, some of which have a very complex constitution. The number of cells in an organism varies according to its size and complexity, some of the lowest, most primitive organisms being unicellular or composed of comparatively few cells, while at the other end the higher plants and animals may contain untold millions of cells. The human brain alone is estimated to have about 9000 million cells! These cells again are of a most diverse character, the cells which build up the various parts and organs of the body being different from each other. Thus the cells of the nerves>and the bones and the muscles and indeed of all parts of the animal organism differ markedly from each other, and the number of the different kinds of cells that go to the making up of a body may be indefinitely large. All these almost innumerable cells of all kinds and degrees of differentiation and complexity are arranged in a stable, orderly structure in the plant or animal body; and this structure is not stationary but like its constituent cells in continual movement and development. The structural order which we have seen characterising the inorganic element or compound is even more characteristic of the vastly more complex organic body with its continuous mobility and transformations.

A plant or an animal can be considered from the point of view of its structure or its functions, that is to say, the activities performed by the structure as a whole or the parts of which it is composed. Viewing it merely as a structure we see the same orderly combination and arrangement of parts as in the inorganic body, only the constituent parts and the structural arrangements are far more complex than in the inorganic body. In water, for instance, or any other chemical compound, all molecules are more or less the same, and the body consists simply of a repetition of the fundamental molecule, and the structures in which the molecules are arranged are likewise of a repetitive character; while in an organic body there may be an indefinite number and variety of cells, and the varieties of arrangements and structures according td which these cells are combined in the several parts and organs of the body may also be indefinite in number.

But the difference between inorganic and organic bodies lies not only in their structures, but even more in their functions, especially the functions of the organic cells, to which there is apparently nothing corresponding in the inorganic world. About these cells we at present know comparatively little, except that their functions and activities are the basis of the functions and activities of the organisms which they compose, all being co-ordinated into a single system of a new type called " life. “ In the march of Evolution from the inorganic to the organic the cell is the real innovation, to which nothing corresponding in the inorganic has yet been discovered. To use a metaphor, the cell is the point where matter or energy roused itself from its slumbers and became active from within, with activities and functions which reveal its inner character and nature, so to say. It is a new structure in which energy develops or acquires a new form of activity, becomes functional, becomes in some inexplicable way endowed with special characters of selectiveness and reproduction, of self-help and self-control, which constitute a unique departure in the universe.

Let us summarise briefly some of the points that are known of the structure and the functions of the cell and as the plant cell is simpler than the animal cell let us take that as the type. It consists of chemically very complex substances called in the aggregate protoplasm, which is the physicochemical basis of all forms of life. Comparatively little is known of its composition or chemical structure. The plant cell (less so the animal cell) secretes a containing wall or membrane for itself from which the cell derives its name. Inside the wall the protoplasm appears as a jelly-like fluid and consists principally of a small nucleus, which contains certain chromatin bodies of a rich protein character, and of a larger body of cytoplasm surrounding the nucleus and reticular in structure, that is to say, consisting of a network of spaces which contain various cell-saps and solutions and even minute particles of crystals and other inorganic bodies. The whole constitutes a colloidal system, as we saw in the last chapter. The cell walls are semi-permeable, admitting of the osmosis through it of certain substances and not of others, so >that suitable food and other substances can be passed through the cell walls from one cell to another. There is a constant circulation and agitation of the cell fluid, which gives it the appearance of a stream, and is much more than the usual promiscuous Brownian movement in inorganic colloidal mixtures. The movement of protoplasm, whether it is Brownian or something different, has much more of the character of definite specific direction; and this is probably only an expression of that selectiveness and directiveness which are inherent and universal characteristics of all lifeforms. Although little is definitely known of the details of cell-structure, the functions it performs are so many-sided, delicate and complex that one may safely say that the cell must have an immensely complex organisation, and that the details of its constitution may never be fully known or even adequately pictured by the human mind. It represents, at the one end of the scale of existence, a minute detailed complexity which is in some sense comparable to the wonders of the astronomical universe at the other end. And all this intricate and complex little system is maintained in a state of active, moving equilibrium; it is dynamic through and through and incessantly active in all its details, and its almost innumerable activities are' finely adjusted to each other and co-ordinated into a harmonious process, which not only maintains its balanced functioning for its individual life, but increases and improves it in the duration of innumerable generations. Looking at this baffling mystery of active, continually changing and developing organisation, with its continuous delicate adjustments of innumerable moving parts into one co-ordinated forward movement, we find that ordinary physical categories of description fail us. We feel ourselves in the presence of an entirely new phenomenon, which we call life, and we may even feel tempted to go further and to say that the cell has not only life but also mind. To do so would, however, be going too far, as I shall explain later.

To appreciate the position more fully let us look at some of the functions of the cell. It is very difficult to realise it, and yet it is the fact, that the little microscopic or ultramicroscopic cell probably does all or most that the plant or animal is known to do. It literally breathes or respires; it takes in, manipulates, digests and assimilates its food; it reproduces its kind; it grows, decays and dies; it heals itself when sick and restores itself when a breakage takes place. It develops special means and mechanisms to assist it in carrying out these operations, and it co-ordinates and regulates all its manifold activities in a way which implies some wonderful central control of all these functions. ' Let ` us look at these operations with a little more detail.

Unlike any other substance in nature, the protoplasm of the cell is vitally active and is in an incessant process of real creative change; parts are continually being destroyed and replaced by new protoplasm which is continually being formed. No other substance has this power of making its own material, so to say. A crystal, for instance, builds itself up from its own material already existing in solution without any change being made in its constitution. The crystal serves merely as an attractive centre round which its material, already present in dissolved form, may be deposited in solid form. With protoplasm the process of growth or renewal is quite different. The material taken in is entirely altered and recombined into the substance of which the protoplasm is composed, and this material, so altered and transformed, is then by some yet unknown process taken up and assimilated into the protoplasm or living substance of the cell. This complete transformation and this mysterious assimilation of its material is one of the most unique functions of the cell, and its far-reaching significance will later on be more particularly stressed.

The technical name for this complete transformation which the cell effects in the material it takes in is metabolism, and it may therefore be said that metabolism is the process which above everything distinguishes living from non-living matter. The cell is not a static or stationary organism; it is for ever being built up by new material which it transforms into its substances, and it is for ever being broken down through the new cell substances which it secretes and gives off in order to build up the various parts of the complete plant or to supply the energy necessary for its functioning. And the activity by which the material is taken in in one form, then transformed and assimilated into the substance of the cell, and then again given off as different cell substances for the building up of the various parts of the plant or the energy supply--this activity, while apparently a series of chemical and physical processes, implies a co-ordinated system which is unlike anything seen in the purely physical or chemical domain. The physical and chemical procedure seems to be merely the mechanisms or instrumentalities used by a deeper organic process, which means and does much more than the physical or chemical details which we can identify. Not only is there control and organisation of these details, but the physico-chemical agencies themselves are of a new type. For instance, oxygen and carbon dioxide appear to be taken in through the stomata of the leaves, but this is not merely a case of ordinary osmosis. Again, liquid materials in the form of dissolved salts or other inorganic substances are taken in through the roots, but this also is not a case of ordinary physical osmosis. Again, these liquids rise in the plant cells as if it were merely a case of surface tension or capillary action. But as a matter of fact these are all cases of metabolism in which subtle changes take place in the protoplasm, changes whose details are no doubt apparently all of a physico-chemical character, but whose distinctive character lies not in these details so much as in the new system of control in which they are organised and regulated. The theory which has been developed to account for the physico-chemical reactions which take place in all organic change and functioning is based on the assumption of very complex substances of the nature of ferments or enzymes being formed and acting in the protoplasm. It is, for instance, through the agency of the enzymes in the protoplasm that all the secretions are formed which build up the different parts of the plant. Thus also the transformation of the carbon dioxide in the green cells of the leaves into starch is not a chemical change of the ordinary type, but is effected in the presence of colloidal catalysts like chlorophyll and other enzymes, at whose surfaces sunlight can transform the carbon dioxide so as to form successively formaldehyde, dextrose, maltose, and finally soluble and insoluble starch. Mere physical and chemical reactions have been identified. But it is quite possible that there is much more, and that the organic process behind them is much more complicated and characteristic. Again, both respiration and metabolism are processes effected through enzyme action at colloid surfaces instead of being of the ordinary mechanical character. The enzymes are thus conceived as being catalytic agents existing in colloidal form in the cells and as having at their surfaces or in their " fields " the power of transforming other substances in the presence of the energy of sunlight or electricity. They do this according to the well-known chemical and physical laws, without themselves being thereby used up or transformed. The cell has the power to build up or secrete these complex enzyme compounds; with the help of these, again, it manufactures other complex substances necessary for the plant or animal life. It carries on many other functions in addition to these manufacturing processes. Throughout it seems to follow simple physical and chemical rules but on a new plan. All this will serve to emphasise how vastly complicated cell structures and activities must be. A large number of the most complicated processes are carried on, scarcely one of which the best-equipped laboratory in the world can perform, and all are carried on by a little cell which is microscopic or smaller in size!

During recent years resolute attempts have been made to -repeat under artificial laboratory conditions what takes place in the living plant, and certain very interesting results have, been obtained. Thus an attempt has been made by Professor Baly and others to imitate photo-synthesis in the laboratory. Light of a short wave-length from a mercury vapour lamp was made to act on water and carbon dioxide, and as a result formaldehyde was obtained and, as in the green leaf, oxygen was set free: CO2 + H2O = CH2O + O2. Light with a somewhat longer wave-length was made to turn this formaldehyde into simple sugars. More recently Prof. Baly has succeeded in synthesising formaldehyde and sugar from carbon dioxide and moisture by the action of sunlight on the surface of certain coloured inorganic compounds, such as nickel carbonate, which take the place of the coloured chlorophyll in the natural process. However interesting and valuable these and similar results are, it is probable if not certain that they have only a distant resemblance to what takes place in the organic process, where the physical factors of sunlight and electrical change acting in the field of colloid chlorophyll are different, and the chemical changes may be different. From a scientific point of view, however, the laboratory work is of undoubted interest and importance, for the detailed reactions in organisms are undoubtedly physical and chemical. In living organisms there is, however, over and above these particular reactions a specific synthesis of them all which constitutes the real essence of life. And the synthesis has an influence over the detailed processes.

The origin of the cell is the origin of life, and we know nothing definite about it. But the question arises whether sufficient is not known about the cell and organic development to justify us in trying to form some general idea as to its possible origin. And here we find one set of phenomena which throws a special light on the nature and development pf organisms and perhaps also on their origins. The phenomena of reproduction seem to hold the very secret of life and, moreover, bring us close to the secret of matter. And this secret common to both, jealously guarded and preserved throughout the whole range of terrestrial evolution, shows a continuity unique in science, which brings together some of the apparently most diverse facts which confront us in the world of matter and of life. How Well the secret has  been guarded and kept and shielded from all outside influences is evidenced by the extraordinary fact that though plant and animal life must have diverged near the beginning of life, and must through many hundreds of millions of years have been moving further apart in the history of this globe, yet the methods of reproduction in plants and animals are still very much alike. The romance of the reproduction of a flowering plant, which is one of the most wonderful in the world, is practically the same, down to many details, as that of the reproduction of one of the higher animals. Going very far back, we find that it is very much the same in some of the simplest, most primitive algae as in the other members of 'the rising plant series--the ferns, the cycads, the conifers and the flowering plants. When we go still further back into the past and come to the case of unicellular organisms, which reproduce themselves not by cell-fusions but by cell-division, we come to the situation, or something very Close to the situation, which must have arisen when matter first organised itself into life. For what do we see? The cell when it proceeds to divide into two assumes the appearance of an electrical and polar system; its nuclear material arranges itself in parallel bodies or chromosomes like an electrical or electro-magnetic field; its centrosome (if any) splits up, as if under some unbearable electrical strain, just as is the case in Radioactivity, and two polar bodies are formed from it at opposite sides of the nucleus, from which lines of force proceed throughout the now disintegrating nucleus and cell; the nuclear bodies of the breaking-up cell divide themselves equally between the two polar bodies, and aggregate and concentrate towards them until finally the separation between the two systems is complete and the material of the nucleus and cell has split into two. The division of the cell into two cells is complete. It is apparent from this summary statement how the cell in division approximates to the character of the atom of matter described in the last chapter. Were they not in the beginning both electrical systems with their nuclei, their fields and their cataclysmic behaviour? In the cell the Original hypothetical electrical character of the division has become overlaid with and obscured by other factors so that the electrical character is no longer recognisable, except in the general appearance and scheme of division. But originally it possibly was electrical, as it still is in appearance. Arguing back from the analogy of cell-division to the probable original rise of the cell from inorganic matter, we may imagine the building up of very complex organic or hydrocarbon compounds under favourable external conditions, in which the influence of sunlight and other forms of electrical energy played an important part, just as sunlight in the presence of chlorophyll still plays a foremost part in the production of new cells and organic substances in plant-life. We know that a' thousand millions of years ago, when life arose, the sun was much hotter than it is to-day, and sunlight contained much more of the chemically active rays Which facilitate organic changes. The peculiar electrical energy of the sun may therefore have played a decisive part in the origin of life. In other words, the part which electrical changes appear to play in the process of cell-division may be somewhat analogous to the part they probably played in the original rise of the cell. The basic electrical structure of matter would thus be paralleled by the more complex electrical origin of the cell. Reproduction of the most primitive forms takes place in a fluid medium, and all protoplasm still has a fluid jelly-like consistency. It is therefore probable that the most primitive forms of protoplasm might have arisen under favourable conditions of sunlight and warmth when the warm water still contained much of the crust in solution or dispersed in small particles in colloidal form, and thus presented conditions favourable for the selective formation of complex substances, such as the predecessors of the present forms of protoplasm. Recent advances in bio-chemistry have led to the isolation and discovery in the animal body of very complex substances (such as glutathione) whose external surfaces absorb free Oxygen and whose interior undergoes the opposite change of setting free this Oxygen and building up higher organic structures. Thus a continual chemical process is set going which is at the same time an electrical current from without inwards, transmitting the electrical energy of sunlight contained in the Oxygen of the air to the interior cell substances, where the Oxygen is deprived of its energy and set free, and where with this energy complex compounds are built up which again store the energy required for the nutrition and other functions of the living organism. The chemical electrical system which forms the fundamental mechanism of life in the last resort simply uses the energy of sunlight, stored in the free Oxygen of the air, for building from it the body of life; and there is thus the closest connection between sunlight and life structures. In that connection, without a doubt, the origin of life must be sought. The cell structure having once been evolved from pre-cell structure, probably by way of prolonged trial and error or " natural selection " extending over long periods of time, its multiplication or reproduction would take place through the part that electrical tension would play. Thus the complex unstable electrical structure or organic substance, whose internal equilibrium would pass through various crises and changes in its " development," would finally tend to break up and under certain conditions proceed to divide. This original haphazard division would gradually become stabilised and standardised, so to speak, until cell-division becomes the regular basis not only of all growth but also of all reproductive processes ill both plant and animal.

At first there could have been no essential difference between growth and reproduction of cells. By division one cell was formed from another, and might either remain in association with the old cell, as is the case in all multicellular organisms (growth), or it might separate from the old cell and develop on its own as an independent organism (reproduction). This simple division still remains the process of growth in all organisms without distinction, and it remains the process of reproduction in all unicellular and the lowest forms of multicellular organisms. In less primitive, more developed multicellular organisms the process of reproduction has, however, become more complex, and has altered to the union or fusion of two specialised cells or gametes to form a new cell; and in such cases another scheme, involving a double set of divisions, has taken the place of the simple division. While one of these simply halves the total contents of the old cell quantitatively as between the two new cells, the other or reduction division separates out the individual chromosome elements in the contents qualitatively so that each of the two new cells has half of these elements. This qualitative halving is necessary to prevent the continual and cumulative doubling of cell elements in the repeated reproduction of the same type of organism, and to keep the chromosome contents of cells of similar organisms constant. The two cells or gametes, thus reduced in all respects to half of what they were before reduction, then unite to form the new cell, which has once more the full complement of chromosome elements. This reduction division in reproduction is common to both plants and animals above the most undeveloped types, and we therefore seem to have some justification for the most remarkable conclusion that this phase of reproduction must have developed before the separation' of plant and animal forms took place. It forms also the basis for that alternation of generations which is one of the most remarkable of all the phenomena of life. Thus all organisms which are reproduced through cell fusion have a generation in which the cells haye the single or haploid contents (after the reduction division) and another in which the cells have the double or diploid contents (before the reduction division). In the higher forms of plants and animals the generation of the single-content cell, or the gametophyte generation as it is called, is reduced to a very subordinate role and a short life, as it covers the short period of the gametes or conjugating cells (the ripe sperm-cells and ova) in flowering plants and in the more developed animals. The generation of the double-contents cell, or the sporophyte generation as it is called, has become dominant and appears as the developed plant or animal which we see in nature to-day. But in some divisions of plants the gametophyte generation is still of some prominence. Thus the moss plant is the gametophyte generation, the sporophyte generation appearing as a subordinate parasitic form. And in the ferns, where the sporophyte is the dominant form, the gametophyte appears as a distinct plant which is in some cases a perennial. And its gelation to the fern as another phase of it was unknown until about the middle of the nineteenth century.

This generation of the single-content or haploid cell, or the gametophyte in the developed plants and animals of to-day, is interesting because it is probably- only another illustration of the well-known principle that ontogeny repeats phylogeny, that is to say, that the history of the individual organism recapitulates in its earlier or embryonic stages of development the various phases of development through which its types of ancestors have evolved in the past. Thus the gametophyte generation is a reminder of that earlier, simpler, more primitive phase in plant evolution when the more complex sporophyte generation, which is dominant to-day, had not yet been evolved through cell fusion in reproduction. Another interesting deduction has also been made. The gametophyte reproduces in a liquid medium, and in this and in other ways carries us back to the time when life on this globe was still more or less aquatic, and the later land forms of the sporophyte had not yet arisen. And it is even possible that the form of the present gametophyte may throw light on the particular descent of plant forms. Thus the gametophyte of the fern is a flat thallus-like plant not unlike an alga. And it is quite possible that this form of the fern may give the, clue to its origin from some alga-like progenitor in the far-distant past. May we not say that the prothallus of the fern appears to connect the alga and the fem, and thus to bridge the most widely separated epochs of the past in the evolution of plant forms?

From speculations as to the origin of the cell we pass on. to consider the differentiations which have taken place among cells generally, and the particular differentiation of cells which has led to the divergence between plant and animal forms. It is commonly thought that the animal forms are a later development and an advance on the earlier plant forms'. This idea is largely due to the fact that in the animal there has been the special development of the new factor of mind which, rapidly rising in the higher animals, has reached its highest level in the human species. But although animal forms may have developed farther and come to attain to much higher levels than the plant forms, the question of origins stands on a different footing. And the evidence points rather to a common origin and to the earliest cells of life having been common to both plants and animals. Thus the lowest forms of cell life are even now practically indistinguishable into plant and animal. And it is probable that this common phase, prior to differentiation into plant and animal forms, must have lasted a very long time and have been marked by considerable advances in the development of the common cells, especially in view of the probable fact, already noted, that sexual reproduction of a fairly advanced type had perhaps been reached before the bifurcation took place and plants and animals were launched on their separate careers. What advance in cell development had been reached before this bifurcation it is impossible to say, as only the very lowest unicellular organisms of a common character still survive, and the geological record has no evidence to give. Differentiation in cells must have commenced as soon as the daughter cells began to adhere to the parent cell and multicellular organisms were formed. In the unicellular Pleurococcus, which is about the simplest plant form known, noticed as the green slime on the damp bark of trees or wooden posts, we see the beginnings of this process of cell aggregation, as daughter cells adhere to the parent cell until several divisions have taken place and only then separate info individual cells. The Pleurococcus cell is globular, but during this attachment the cells are flattened at the surfaces of contact. In the multicellular organisms a layer of cuticle covers the outer cell walls in contact with the air and retards the loss of water. Step by step other differentiations appear, and the plant body becomes more complex as we advance from alga to fem, and from fern to the higher, seed-bearing plants. The differentiations into various organs, such as the root, stem, leaf and reproductive organs, are simply means towards the division of physiological labour. Thus in cells away from the light photo-synthesis is impossible, and they become dependent on the outer green cells; similarly the roots underground become dependent for starch on the green cells and in return absorb dissolved salts for supply to the rest of the plant. The water requirements render necessary the fibrovascular cell system, while the reproductive functions become confined to special organs. All this differentiation means more organisation and a more elaborate structure of the plant. In addition to this division of labour the struggle for existence tests the structure in other directions, and means more modification in response to the stress of the struggle and the stimulus of the environment generally. As a result the plant structure comes to be elaborated and adapted to the inner and external demands upon it, and to assume the 'forms which are known to us.

Besides this general differentiation and organisation, there are special causes which have brought about the divergence of plant and animal forms. A consideration of these matters falls outside the scope of our task. Generally it may be said that plant-life has been determined and stereotyped through the two processes of photo-synthesis and osmosis, the second of which has enabled it to get water and mineral salts direct from the soil, and the first of which has enabled it by the help of chlorophyll to utilise the energy of sunlight for making sugars, starch and cellulose from the carbon dioxide of the air. The plant, being thus dependent for its food solely on the soil and the air, could afford to remain stationary and mostly fixed in the soil; while animal forms, which are dependent on organic foods, have had to be mobile in order to look for and find the necessary plant or animal substances on which to live. The struggle for food has been a much harder one for animals, which have in consequence not only had to be mobile and develop a complex motor system, but also to evolve in the nervous system a special co-ordinating mechanism with which to work the motor system. This mechanism, again, has led to unique developments in the direction of sensitiveness and consciousness, which in the case of man have come to overshadow all that has gone before. But mind is a later development, the discussion of which should not be raised in connection with the cell. The primitive cell of life is on the way to Mind, but Mind in any proper sense of the term is at this stage still ' far off, and those who ascribe Mind or even potential Mind to the cell open the door to the most serious confusions. The cell undoubtedly presents a great mystery. And there is a strong temptation to ascribe its surprising activities to an inner mentality or organic psychism. But even the most highly evolved human intelligence finds it difficult to understand all that goes on in the cell. If psychism is the key, we should have to ascribe to the cell so large a measure of mentality as to reduce the whole supposition of psychism to absurdity. The cell has not yet mind. Mind as we know it, or anything at all resembling it, is a much later development in the process of organic Evolution, as will be shown in Chapter IX.

Enough has been said about the structure and the functions of the cell to give a rough general idea of what the cell is. Let us now pass on to consider the inter-relations of elements in the cell, and among cells in the same organism, and especially the aspect of co-ordination in and among cells. In the first place I ask: Is the cell and are cells in an organism a co-operative system, in which the parts and their functions are so ordered and arranged that they co-operate for common purposes, and do not merely subserve the separate ends of the individual parts?

There could be no doubt as to the answer. The whole meaning and significance of Metabolism is that the activities of the cell are not self-centred or self-regarding. The cell functions for other cells and for the plant as a whole. One element in the cell functions for other elements and for the whole cell organism. The secretions formed in one cell are intended to build up other cells or to serve the plant as a whole. The fibro-vascular cells carry liquid food from one part of the plant to the other parts. The carbohydrates formed in the green cells are transmitted and stored as food for all the other cells; the woody substances secreted from them are meant to strengthen other cells and the plant as a whole against the forces of the environment; the aroma and bloom which are secreted from them are meant to render attractive and adorn other parts of the plant-with a view to the preservation of the plant species as a whole. Indeed, all the processes of Metabolism go to prove that the plant is one vast co-operative system, in which the individual cells in their continuous functions and labours make their contribution to the common cause, and work so that other cells or the plant itself or the species to which it belongs may live. The cell is a delicate problem not only of structure but also of inter-related functions, so co-adapted that a real whole is thereby constituted. The cell in its normal structure and functions is the very type of cooperative action.

So far I believe we are still on firm ground in our description of cell activities, and the co-operative character of organic functioning will be generally admitted. Can we go further and characterise this co-operation more closely? What is the nature of this cell or organic co-operation? Is it spontaneous or controlled? And if controlled, is it controlled internally or externally? Let me repeat the question in another form. Are the cells and the organs which they form in the same plant or animal free and independent, so that the co-operation which we observe in their functioning is a mere accidental result of their individual uncontrolled reactions and behaviour? Or is there some co-ordinating factor which influences the cells and their organs in some specific direction, and thus co-ordinates and unifies their functions and produces the co-operation we observe? And if the cells are not independent agents in the make-up of the organism but are under some form of unifying influence or control, is this an external factor like Natural Selection as commonly understood? Or is there some internal principle of co-ordination, the influence of which is felt by the different cells, and in response to which they react, so that their functions proceed generally on the lines of a plan or pattern given by the nature of the particular organism? In either case there would be co-operation on the basis of co-ordination, but in the one case there would be an external, and in the other an internal, factor at work in this co-ordination. It will be seen that the issue here raised as between the cells inside the organism is analogous to that which Darwinism has raised as between separate organisms in their struggle for existence. The answer, so far as the struggle among organisms is concerned, will be discussed in Chapter VIII. And the results there reached will probably apply also to the case of the cell or 'the cells in an organism which is here raised. The subject is not free from controversy, and in this chapter I wish to avoid controversy and simply to describe the facts in the ordinary language of metaphor which I trust will not prove misleading. And looking at the facts in an unprejudiced way, and without a bias in favour of any particular theory, one cannot help being struck by the way in which the cells in an organism not only co-operate, but co-operate in a specific direction towards the fulfilment and maintenance of the type of the particular organism which they constitute. At this stage we have to steer clear of all ideas of plan, purpose or teleology in the organic procedure. But, even so, the impression is irresistible that cell activities are co-operative, that they are inherently or through selective development co-ordinated in a specific direction, and that the impress of the whole which forms the organism is clearly stamped on all the details. The case is utterly unlike that of molecules in a piece of mere matter, which are alike, which are repetitions of each other, and which can be added or subtracted or otherwise expressed arithmetically. The cells are different, they are differentiated in definite respects, and the totality of differentiations fit into a plan or scheme, the fulfilment of which constitutes the complete organism. There are no repetitions, there is uniqueness everywhere, and the various unique entities and their functions fit into each other more or less so as to produce an organic whole. This whole is not an artificial result of its parts; there is something more than the parts, and this something appears to be in definite relation with them, influenced by them and again influencing them, and through this continuous interaction maintaining the moving equilibrium of structure and functions which is the organism.

Look, for instance, at the way in which organisms behave when some cells or organs, necessary for their maintenance, are removed or injured. It is well known that many plants and animals have the power of restitution in case of damage or mutilation. The newt forms a new leg in the place of the severed limb. The plant supplies the place of the severed branch with another. The regeneration may be effected from different organs and by different organs. Thus if the crystalline lens is removed from the eye of a Triton, the iris will regenerate a new lens, although the lens and the iris in this case have been evolved from quite different parts. Numerous similar curious facts of restoration could be mentioned. The broken whole in organic nature restores itself or is restored by the undamaged parts. The cells of the remaining parts perform the novel task of restoring the missing parts. The power to do this varies with various plants or animals, and varies also with the different parts in the same plant or animal. Generally one may say that the more highly differentiated and specialised an organism or a cell is, the smaller is its plasticity, or the power of the remaining cells to restore the whole in case of injury or mutilation. But the fact that the power exists in numerous cases is a proof that not only can the cells through reproduction build up the original organism according to its specific type, but also that when this type is damaged, the remaining cells or some of them can restore it, and recomplete the whole. The normal power of the cells to build up an organism in reproduction or embryological development according to type is one thing, and it is marvellous enough even though one looks upon it as merely a case of inherited routine. But the abnormal power to do this in the very unusual case, so far removed from all idea of routine, where the type is accidentally broken down, is something different, and shows how effective is the power of the organism as a whole, and how strong is the tendency towards the whole even in the individual cells. In some subtle way the damage creates a need, and the need stimulates the remaining parts to perform the functions (quite new to them) of the damaged parts or to restore them in whole or in part. The very nature of the cells is to function as parts of a whole, and when the whole is broken down an unusual extra task automatically arises for them to restore the breach, and their dormant powers are aroused to action. And this happens, so far as we can see, simply as a matter of interior economy and domestic regulation in the organism itself and without previous education for the new role. The interaction between the organism and its cells is indeed most subtle and intimate; both seem to be active factors in the maintenance of the whole and in the restoration of any parts that may be missing and necessary for the whole. So intimate is their interaction that it is almost impossible to say where the influence of the one ends and the other begins.

The aspect of co-ordination or subordination of parts to the whole is also most significantly illustrated by the phenomena of reproduction which I have already referred to in another connection. Reproduction not only carries- us back to the past and its riddles, but also forward to the future, and it is the reproductive system of organisms that we must scan most closely if we wish to understand this aspect of organic activities. For in reproduction the cell or the organism clearly appears to go beyond itself, its functions become transcendent, as far as it is, itself concerned; its blind strivings and energies embrace objects and situations beyond itself. In fact, in reproduction the cell or the organism bears clear testimony to the fact that it is not itself alone, and that it is part of a larger situation of life towards the fulfilment of which its most fundamental functions are directed. As an illustration of the coordinated inter-relations of parts and whole in organism, nothing can therefore be more significant and important than the facts of organic reproduction. Here more than anywhere else the importance of the whole appears, not merely the immediate whole or individual organism, but also the transcendent whole or the type which has to be reproduced and maintained at all costs'. Throughout the entire range of organic nature one. is impressed with the essential selflessness, the disregard of self, and the transcendence of self in the reproductive process, which harnesses the individual to the needs of the race exhausts its reserves of strength, and often costs it its life. On that process is stamped, as on the very heart of Nature, the principle of sacrifice, of the subordination of the part to the whole, of the individual to the race or type.

The preceding analysis will have enabled us to realise that the plant or the animal is a whole consisting of millions of parts in the form of cells of all kinds, while the cells again are smaller wholes of indefinite complexity and marvellous activities. All these parts are co-ordinated and arranged down to the most minute details, and function with the most complete collaboration in support of each other and the organism. The organism is indeed a little living community in which law and order reign, and in which every part collaborates with every other part, and subserves the common purposes of the community, as a rule with the most perfect regularity. It is this perfect community of functions and unity of action in a system consisting of innumerable parts and the most complex structural arrangements that makes the organism such a striking type of a whole. We have seen structural order as the characteristic of inorganic matter; we now see active co-operation and unity of action superadded as the characteristic of the organism. We admire the order and co-operation of a beehive or a community of ants; in the organism wp see a more perfect order and a more wonderful co-operation in a situation which is perhaps not much less complex than either. And just as the individual bee or ant lives its own life and is not lost in the joint venture of the hive or nest, so the individual cell lives its own life and specialises and perfects itself for its role in the organism which it helps to form and to serve without loss or sacrifice of its own identity. The organism embraces innumerable smaller organic units whose identity is not swallowed up in it, is expressed and not suppressed by it. The large organism does not only mean the union and co-operative harmony of its smaller units, but also as a rule the more perfect individuation and specialised development of these units in the harmony of the whole. The plant or animal body is a social community, but a community which allows a substantial development to its individual members. And its nature and structure are such that it can only perfect itself through the differentiation and development of the members which compose it. But while this is so, while (as we have seen and shall see more clearly in the sequel) individuation is fundamental in Nature, we have to recognise that intensive co-operation plays a no less important and fundamental part. An organism is fundamentally a society in which innumerable members co-operate in mutual help in a spirit of the most effective disinterested service and loyalty io each other. Co-operation and mutual help are written large on the face of Nature. Nay, more, if cell structure and function can teach us anything, they are imprinted deep on the world of life, they are the very meaning and soul of Nature. We may travel far through the realms of Evolution, but nowhere shall we find a more perfect co-operation or a more beautiful illustration of mutual help of one part for another, and of all parts for the whole, as well as of the whole for all its parts, than in the little insignificant cell, which seems to hold the very secret of the universe. Anticipating the language of later developments, we may say that in the cell there is implicit an ideal of harmonious co-operation, of unselfish mutual service, of loyalty and duty of each to all, such as in our later more highly evolved human associations we can only aspire to and strive for.

When there was achieved the marvellous and mysterious stable constellation of electrical units in the atom, a miracle was wrought which saved the world of matter from utter chaos and chance. But a far greater miracle was wrought when from the atomic and the molecular order there was evolved a still deeper and subtler order in the inner cooperative harmony of the cell. These two fundamental structures are the great abiding achievements in the course of Evolution, before the advent of Mind, and though many other experiments were probably made before and in between these successes, they proved unstable and were discarded and abandoned, and are now searched for in vain. We have to scrutinise these abiding peaks of achievement if we wish to understand the real nature of the Evolutionary process, and if we wish to form an idea of the nature of the ground in between these permanent structures which has been washed away in the endless lapse of time. And when we find the two to be not utterly different but expressions of a somewhat similar inner progressive tendency of Nature, and when we find later, on the mental and spiritual levels of development, still clearer expressions of a similar tendency, we shall be justified in concluding that we are face to face with something real and true of far-reaching importance, a vera causa in Nature. The impression becomes so strong that it is not so much a matter of speculation as a recognition of clear simple facts before us. These permanent structures in Nature have been and are still being patiently investigated for us by Science. As I said in the last chapter, they present more than a faint family resemblance and enable us to recognise the unity which underlies them and to draw certain conclusions as to the origin of this unity. They point to a universal pervading feature of Nature. The evidence in favour of such a synthetic ordering feature or process has been accumulating in this and the two preceding chapters; it requires isolation, identification and exact formulation, if that were possible. And in the next chapter a preliminary attempt at such an identification and formulation will be made.
