---
title: "Darwinism and Holism"
chapter: 8
---

Summary: Darwin's conception of Organic Descent and his formulation of its laws were the beginning of one of the most far reaching revolutions in human thought. Holism gives a new view of the Darwinian factors, and extends the scope of Evolution beyond the purely organic domain. Darwin traced Organic Descent to the interwoven effects of two factors; an inner creative factor, Variation, operating spontaneously and somewhat mysteriously inside organisms and modifying their hereditary structures and functions in very slight degrees; and an external factor, Natural Selection, which operates selectively on these slight variations, weeding out those organisms whose variations were less suitable to their environment, and leaving the organisms with suitable variations to multiply and develop. By continuous summation of small useful variations through many generations definite specific characters would in time be achieved and new species arise.

Darwin laid most stress on the factor of Natural Selection; on Variation he was vague and "hesitating, but there is little doubt that he included not only inborn variations but individually acquired modifications among the elements which ultimately become specific characters. Thus all the multitudinous forms of life would in the end be moulded by both factors into very close conformity and adaptation to their conditions of life.

The great Darwinian conception has been somewhat blurred by later developments, in which attention has been concentrated on the factor of Variation rather than on Natural Selection. First Weismann denied the transmissibility of acquired characters, and thus made it difficult to understand how organisms through their experience and habits of life become gradually fitted and adapted to their environment. Then De Vries eliminated all small variations from the account and attributed all specific advance to large wellmarked " mutations " occurring very occasionally. This made it still more difficult to understand slow age-long adajftation, for instance, to habitats and ecological conditions. Finally, the Mendelians or Geneticists have developed the conception that in organisms there are well-marked stable unit-characters whose I8l combination in crossing follow a certain definite law; and the experimental Evolution and Genetics of to-day consist mostly in tracing these unit-characters and their manipulations in breeding and in the laboratory. The idea of more or less mechanical combinations thus takes the place of the idea of creative variations, which underlay the Darwinian conception, and it becomes most difficult to understand how the new variation arises, and how it is that Evolution is really progressive and creative, and not a more or less stationary regime of casual character combinations.

These later developments take too narrow a view of Evolution as a whole and therefore tend to become one-sided and to overemphasise certain aspects of the whole process. They are, however, right in their emphasis on the inner creative factor which is the real positive motive force of Evolution. The real secret is in the cell, in the germ-cell or fertilised ovum rather than in the external situation, important as that is.

There is, however, no doubt that variation is influenced indirectly by external ecological conditions, which show themselves in the general characters of plant formations and societies, for instance. And there can likewise be little doubt that acquired characters in the long run reach down to the hereditary germ-cell and become transmissible variations. While these variations are still small and without survival value the acquired characters and animal routine shield and nurse them until they are strong and developed enough to confer survival value on their organisms. Modifications thus are the rough material of variations; and in that sense Weismann was wrong, and Darwin--and further back, even Lamarck--right.

There is, however, a further complication which cannot be dealt with on purely Darwinian principles. Modifications and variations do not come singly but in complexes, involving many minor and consequential modifications and variations. Are they all individually " selected," even before they have any survival value or strength? These difficulties force us to look deeper, to abandon the idea of the individual selection of variations, and to look upon the advance as not being that of a single variation or variations but of the organism as a whole. It is the organism that advances on a certain more or less limited front; the " variation " is only the most conspicuous point of advance, but there is a whole curve of advance involving many other minor points. In other words, the advance is holistic and the variation is only the most striking item of a whole series. And the progress and survival of the variation are an equally holistic affair. The organism is simply maintaining its own advance in the variation; the variation issues from it and is in conformity with its whole trend and movement; the variation is not single and unsupported, but behind it is the whole force of the organism, of whose inner movement the variation is but the most tangible expres sion. It is thus the organism as a whole which in the first instance " selects " the winning variation or series, and confers on it support and survival value. " Holistic Selection “' is therefore in operation at the birth and through the early nursing stage of the variation, and it is only at its maturity that Natural Selection takes over, and the variation begins to fend for itself, so to say.

Holism must likewise be called in to explain organic co-ordination. It is, for instance, impossible without it satisfactorily to explain all the innumerable co-ordinations and co-adaptations in structure and functions which constitute the action of a living organism. No merely mechanical explanation of co-ordinated animal movements or action has even been given. The animal acts as a whole, with a unity and effectiveness of action which is no mere mechanical composition of its movements. Holism not merely as a concept, but as a real feature, is necessary to account for this unique unity of organic or psychic action.

Holism not only includes variations, but just as much repression of variations. It is as often inhibition as creation. Certain features are held in check, while others are released and pushed forward in organic evolution. Thus the balanced whole of the Type is achieved. This repressive aspect of progress is neglected by Darwinism, but it is ust as real as the active variation. Both together underlie the types and structures of life. This repressive tendency, already fully at work on the organic level, becomes much more conspicuous on the psychical level, where it operates as ethical restraint, so essential in the formation of the Personality as a moral whole.

From the holistic point of view it can be shown that the inner and outer factors in Evolution lie much closer together than is commonly thought, and the grandeur of the Darwinian vision, instead of being dimmed, stands out in even greater fullness.

Finally, Beauty in Nature is holistic, is of the whole, comes from Holism, and is explicable on no other principle. Holism as a theory thus accounts not only for the origin of forms and types, but also for their Values, which far transcend the survival values necessary, merely for the utilitarian purposes of Nature.

NEWTON'S Law of Gravitation is perhaps the most striking instance in the whole history of science of one simple generalisation bringing within its sweep the widest array of physical facts. The new heliocentric point of view had already become generally accepted when this law was formulated, but vast masses of facts remained which could not be co-ordinated, and required explanation from the new point of view. The concept of gravitation with its law of the Inverse Square, as laid down by Newton, was completely effective. The phenomena of falling bodies on this earth, the motions of terrestrial bodies, the movements of the solar system and of the starry universe as a whole, many of the phenomena of physics as known and understood at that time--all seemed to find their correct place and explanation under this all-embracing formula.

Newton did not pretend to understand or explain gravitation itself, and his lifelong meditations on this' profound problem afforded him no clue as to the nature of gravitation. But the law of its action, the phenomena which happen on its assumption, he formulated with a simplicity and effectiveness which made it another instance of Columbus' egg. In the way of all human matters the law itself came to be looked upon as more than a law, as an explanation, indeed as an operative factor explaining all the phenomena which it covers. And it is only in our own day that gravitation in this sense has been shattered, and its law as formulated by Newton has come to have a restricted application. Relativity has dethroned gravitation, nd for the moment Einstein's Ten Equations rule the universe, where before the equation of the inverse square was tne only and unquestioned code.

Immanuel Kant, himself one of the great kings and legislators of thought, looked upon the Newtonian system as final; he raised the vision of some future Newton who would discover and formulate the laws of life, as Newton had laid down the laws of motion and of matter. Beyond all doubt Darwin fulfilled that vision, not perhaps in the sense intended by Kant, yet in a way which has made him perhaps an even more epoch-making figure than Newton. Newton proved epoch-making for science, while Darwin has become epoch-making in a far more fundamental sense. He has changed our whole human orientation of knowledge and belief, he has given a new direction tp our outlook, our efforts and aspirations, and has probably meant a greater difference for human thought and action than any other single thinker. But even he is not final.

He even less than Newton is final. He has pointed the great way, and on that way we are already travelling beyond his great vision.

Let me first state Darwin's law, which was just as simple as Newton's, and much more easily intelligible. Among living beings there is a tendency to vary and over-multiply; in consequence, a struggle for survival becomes inevitable, and in this struggle for existence the fittest survive. This explains the origin of species and all organic differences in the world. The tendency to variations is a fact patent to everyone; so is the over-multiplication of individuals under favourable conditions and in the absence of external restraints; the resulting struggle which Darwin calls Natural Selection is well known to everyone who has the least knowledge of animate Nature. These are the simple bricks of fact with which the Darwinian theory is constructed. Surely as striking a case of Columbus' egg as was ever presented. The genius of the Master was shown by the vastness of the structure he produced from these simple concepts of common sense and common experience. From these commonplace facts he explained the infinite variety of the forms of life which occupy the earth, their geographical distribution Jboth in the past and in the present over the face of the globe, and the marvellous closeness of their adaptation to the physical and other conditions among which they live--adaptation to land and sea, to fresh and to salt water, to conditions of soil and climate embracing the extremes of heat and cold, to the widest range of wet, arid and desert conditions, and to all the innumerable facts and situations which lead to -the interweaving of the mysterious web of life.

The whole Darwinian theory is summarised in the last sentences of the Origin of Species with a simplicity and beauty of statement worthy of the simple but profound genius of the Master, and they raise before us in a few touches the great Darwinian vision. They have often been quoted, but will bear re-quotation here, and for all time:

“It is interesting to contemplate a tangled bank, clothed with many plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different from each other, and dependent upon each other in so complex a manner, have all been produced by laws acting around us. These laws, taken in the largest sense, being Growth with Reproduction; Inheritance which is almost implied by reproduction; Variability from the indirect and direct action of the conditions of life, and from use and disuse; a Ratio of Increase so high as to lead to a struggle for life, and as a consequence to Natural Selection, entailing Divergence of Character and the extinction of less-improved forms. Thus, from the war of Nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of the higher animals, directly follows. There is grandeur in this view of life; with its several powers, having been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been and are being evolved.

I am free to confess that there are few passages in the great literature of the world which affect me more deeply than these concluding words of Darwin's great book. They have a force and a beauty out of all proportion to their simple unadorned phrasing. They are the expression of a great selfless soul, who sought truth utterly and fearlessly, and was in the end vouchsafed a vision of the unity of life which perhaps has never been surpassed in its fullness and grandeur. Darwin assumed two operative factors in the organic world: (1) Variation in the reproduction and inheritance of living beings, and (2) Natural Selection, or the survival of the fittest, as Herbert Spencer called it. Darwin's name is principally associated with the second factor, with which his works mostly deal, and which he elaborated with an unrivalled wealth of detail. He devoted much less attention to Variation, and indeed used it chiefly as a peg on which to hang his theory of the origin of species through Natural Selection. Variation was to him a mysterious fact for Natural Selection to work on. But its spontaneous uncontrolled character puzzled him. He found no helpful imagery to explain the puzzle. He suggested the theory of Pangenesis, which showed great insight, but it has not been adopted by his successors. The germ-cell theory, which supplied a mechanism for heredity and variation alike, was a later discovery. The science of Genetics has mainly arisen since his day. Not only were his views on variation meagre and vague, but such views as he had have not been adopted by later Darwinians. Thus in the passage just quoted he attributes variation to the " direct and indirect action of the conditions of life, and to use and disuse." Most Darwinians to-day hold very pronounced views in the opposite direction, and deny that these are the sources of Variation. At present there seem to be indications of- abreaction, of a return to Darwin and even to Lamarck, and a tendency to look more favourably upon the views of Darwin on this important point. But the fact is that Darwin ison the whole vague on the subject of Variation, and concentrated all his strength on the other principle of Natural Selection and its effects in shaping the organic world.

However this may be, there is no doubt that both Variation and Natural Selection are essential elements in the Darwinian theory. Darwinism, in fact, implies two factors: an internal factor, operating mysteriously in the inmost nature and constitution of living organisms, and an external factor working along independent lines on the results achieved by the internal factor. The inner factor, Variation, is positive and creative, producing all the variations which are the raw material for progress. The external factor, i88 Natural Selection, is essentially negative and destructive, eliminating the harmful or less fit or useful variations, and leaving the more fit or useful variations free play to continue and multiply, and in this process fitting and adapting the individual to the character of its environment. As De Vries has phrased it, the inner factor explains the arrival, and the external factor the survival, of the fit or useful variation or organism.

Darwin's over-emphasis of the second or external factor had one very unfortunate result: it directly and powerfully reinforced and exaggerated the mechanistic conception of the universe. The vera causa of organic change and progress appeared to be Natural Selection,an external factor operating on organisms ab extra, in the same way as physical or dynamical forces are impressed on bodies or their parts from the outside. Mechanical analogies began to be applied, and Evolution came to be looked upon as the mechanics of organic development--Entwicklungsmechanik, the term popularised by Wilhelm Roux. The whole tendency of Darwinism has therefore been vastly to"add to the dominance of the mechanistic hypothesis, which has through it come to extend its sway from the kingdom of matter to that of life. What is more, the simplicity of the Darwinian theory has helped to make, not only Evolution, but the mechanical view of Evolution, common property. The mystery of progress seemed to become quite simple and intelligible on this theory. It all depended on the survival of the fittest, and the survival of the fittest was so simple and clear an idea, and one too so deeply rooted in our ordinary empirical experience, that it seemed all a matter of course which had only to be pointed out by Darwin to be accepted by everybody. The difficult part of the theory, the aspect of it which even to Darwin had remained a mystery, the inner creative factor of Variation, was ignored while Darwinism was in the course of being generally accepted, and accepted in the mechanical sense.

This was the first phase of Darwinism, the phase during which Natural Selection was chiefly stressed and was the dominant note in the theory. Then came the second phase, when attention began to be given to the other factor of Variation. With this Neo-Darwinian phase the name of Weismann is for ever honourably associated. Weismann turned the gaze of Evolutionists from the outside to the inside of the' process, from the apparent mechanism of external interaction and clash to the mystery of the inner process. And what he taught was not only most surprising, but remains in its final Mendelian form one of the most significant and important truths in the whole range of biology. I shall deal with this matter just now. But before doing so I wish to point out that Weismann and his fellow-workers were handicapped in their labours by the mechanical view of Evolution which had already become a fixed dogma in the earlier stage of Darwinism. If anywhere, the mechanistic conception should have received its quietus in the domain of Variation, in the exploration of the inner process or factor of Evolution. Unfortunately Weismann and several of the most prominent biologists who developed this second phase of Darwinism undertook their task not only as convinced Darwinians, but as mechanistic Darwinians.

The great battle in which Darwinism had won was tacitly considered a victory for the mechanical view of it. And thus the whole problem of Variation, as viewed by these leading Neo-Darwinians, came to be one of investigating or finding the mechanism of Variation. Their services have been great, and the route they have opened up will in the years to come lead to even greater results. But there is no doubt that the mechanistic conception has been a grave handicap to them, and that many of their errors are directly traceable to its disturbing and distorting influence.

The root of Weismann's difficulties lies in his mechanistic conception of the germ-cell. The cell, as we saw in Chapter IV, in its metabolism already shows many of the functions and activities which we associate with the complete individual organism. It is itself a holistic individual, with the most marvellous selective and regulative powers, reminding us (on a much lower plane) of what at a later stage of Evolution appears as the psychical factor. This applies to the germ-cell even more than to the ordinary body-cells. Here the concept of the " field " is specially important. Experimental Evolutionists seek more in the physical elements of the germ-cell than is there. There is, for instance, more in the heredity of the germ-cell than can be identified by an analysis of its elements. And this more is in its field/' which represents that part of the germ-cell which has not crystallised and hardened into sensible structure. The organic field, as explained in a previous chapter, is the milieu of interwoven influences, of internal and external stimuli and responses, in and around the cell or the organism. The functioning of the cell or organism as a whole depends on this milieu as much as on individual elements in the structure. Much of its past and its future is in its field; in its field the creative adjustments are begun which are ultimately translated and incorporated into its structure. Here as elsewhere the field is the area of becoming, of creativeness, the growing surface of the structure. To confine our view of the germ-cell to its identifiable elements of structure is simply to atomise our conceptions on chemical analogies, and to narrow them unduly to the neglect of very important features in the functions and activities of the germ-cell, and to compel us in the end to adopt that mechanical view which is the negation of its inmost nature as a living holistic individual unity. In this chapter I shall endeavour to show how the concept of Holism acts as a solvent for the difficulties created by the mechanistic conception of Variation.

The alterations in the Darwinian scheme introduced by Darwin's successors have had a profound effect on that scheme as a whole; so much so that it is to-day difficult to say how much of Darwin's great vision still survives. In order to realise this, it would be advisable to compare Darwin's general ideas of the facts of Variation with the modifications introduced by his successors.

In Darwin's view, it was not only the operation of Natural Selection that was moulding living things in conformity with their environment, by eliminating those that were less suited to the conditions of the environment. Variation was also bearing its share in this process of assimilating and adapting them to the environment. The close fitting of species to their habitats and environmental conditions which is so distinctive of animate Nature was, according to him, the combined effect both of Natural Selection and Variation.

In order to ensure clearness in what follows we have to distinguish between various forms of so-called " variation " in living things. In the first place, we have modifications, which are due to the functional activities and experiences of the individual in its own life, and not to inheritance from patents or ancestors. The effects on the bodily organism or on particular organs of their use or disuse in any definite way would be such modifications. An animal changes its mode of life and in consequence ceases to use certain organs, or begins to use them in a new way or for a new purpose. Such disuse tends to the atrophy of these organs, just as such new or increased use would develop them. Such atrophy or development respectively in the bodily organism is a modification. All changes or characteristics acquired during the individual life are modifications.

In the second place we have variations, which are small inborn changes passing by inheritance, arid not due to the developments or acquisitions of the individual life. A small alteration from the type which an animal has inherited from its parents is a variation, in contradistinction to a modification which has been brought about in its own lifetime. In the third place, a large very. marked inborn change is called a mutation. Any inborn change large and marked enough to constitute a new variety or species is a mutation.

Now I think it is beyond question that according to Darwin's view all three forms of change--modifications, variations and mutations--were useful and operative in the ultimate production of new species. Modifications due to individual use pr disuse he certainly pressed into the service of his scheme of Evolution; and although it is not quite clear how far other modifications were similarly treated by him, it follows from the above quotation as well as from other passages in his works that variations due " to the indirect or direct action of the conditions of life," in other words, alterations affecting the individual life, could, to an extent never clearly defined by him, avail for the production of new species. As regards mutations, while he gave reasons for disbelieving in great and sudden changes as the ordinary rule of evolution, it can certainly not be said that he excluded them. His view was that the slow and gradual summation of small fluctuations and variations continuously conserved or kept going by Natural Selection would, and in fact did, in the course of many generations amount to a sufficiently large and marked change to constitute a new type or species. The continuous summation of the effects of use and disuse and the other conditions of life, as well as the accidental inborn variations which were of a more mysterious origin, would necessarily co-operate with Natural Selection in bringing about the close adaptation of fihe species to its environment. The result was the vast and intricate system of adaptations and co-adaptations, of harmonious adjustment between Nature and organic life, ramifying through the infinite details of the web of life which we see in Nature. Thus Evolution was explained, thus all the fine adjustments and adaptations in Nature were explained. Only a very long time was required for the infinitesimal calculus of Natural Selection to produce specific results, and that requirement was conceded by the astronomers and geologists. Darwin's view seemed very well to fit in with the fossil record as well as with the facts of geographical distribution which he looked upon as the keystone to the laws of life. No wonder that the appeal of Darwin's theory proved irresistible and its effect crushing on all the older points of view. The triumph of Darwin's splendid vision of Evolution seemed complete.

Then the second phase of Darwinism began, with the detailed search for the methods and mechanism of Variation and with the venue shifted from the ample range of Nature to the research laboratory of Genetics. First Weismann negatived the inheritance of acquired characters, and of modifications 'due to use or disuse or other environmental conditions operating on the individual life. Only the accidental germinal variations, and none of the moulding effects of the environment on the individual, could avail in the building up of new species. Then De Vries came forward and largely eliminated small variations from the account, and thus practically confined progress to mutations. Finally, the experimental Mendelians or Geneticists appeared, and through their researches and experiments appeared to confine Evolution to the interchange, the combinations and permutations of definite existing unit characters. The combined effect of these three advances on the Darwinian theory might appear largely destructive of Darwinism itself. If, following the Mendelians, we hold that the interchange of definite preexisting unit characters is all there is in the process of Evolution, real advance becomes impossible and creative Evolution disappears. If, according to De Vries, accidental mutation is in a large measure all there is for Natural Selection to work on, the advance becomes indeed a most precarious affair, instead of that steady, continuous, delicate process which has been going on through the geological ages. If, according to Weismann, modifications from use and disuse and similar causes have no survival value and are inoperative in the formations of new species, it becomes most difficult to understand the universal close-fitting adaptations of species to their conditions of life. For there is nothing in common between the accidental variations and Natural Selection, and there is no clear reason why or how this clash should not produce chaos and disaster, rather than the harmonies and adjustments which actually characterise the relations of animate and inanimate Nature. Darwin's theory, even if it were wrong in its details, certainly served to explain o and render intelligible the broad facts of the order, adjustment and progress observable in animate Nature. His successors' theories, even where they are correct in detail, fail to explain these facts, and make of the world of life as a whole an unintelligible and in some respects an incredible affair.

It would, however, be a serious mistake to look upon the more recent developments in the science of Genetics as covering the whole wide field of the Darwinian theory. So far as I know, they have no such scope, nor are they so intended or understood by those who are responsible for the very important researches in Genetics now being success fully carried on in biological laboratories. These researches are intended to follow up a special line which was first opened up by the experiments of the Abbot Mendel of Brunn in the time of Darwin. They occupy a very restricted area of the whole field of organic Evolution, and are really concerned only with the elucidation of the special set of problems arising from the crossing or hybridising of races, varieties or definitely distinct variations. Those problems centre around the important question how biological characters already in existence, whether patbnt or masked, behave when brought into contact with each other. Mendel found that certain existing characters behaved as firm and stable units, very much as atoms or molecules do in chemical combination, and he also discovered the law of the proportions in which these unit characters are reproduced in the offspring. Thus if individuals of dominant character a are crossed with individuals having recessive character b, then in the second filial generation the members of individuals respectively with a characters, and b characters, and mixed a and b characters are given by the algebraic formula (a + b)2 = a2 + 2ab + b2. In other words, 25 per cent, of the second generation will be pure a's and pure b’s respectively, and 50 per cent, will represent individuals with mixed qualities, which on being again crossed with each other will again produce pure a's and b's and mixed ab's in the same algebraic proportions; and so on apparently ad infinitum. His researches have been amply confirmed by later inquiries, which have also established that not only do these unit characters behave as fixed and stable entities, but, very much in the manner of radicle groups in Chemistry, groups of such unit characters also sometimes behave as stable combinations, and enter into combination with other unit characters as persistent unities. This is all very remarkable and interesting, and has important bearings on the practical improvement of breeds and races of animals, and on the beginnings of the new science of Eugenics. But for our present purpose it is merely necessary for me to point out that Mendelism or Genetics deals with the manipulation of existing characters, and not with their origin, genesis or creation. The main question before organic Evolution, how specific characters are produced which have not existed before, is not directly touched by Mendelism. The problem of the creativeness of Evolution in the origin of species, and in organic progress generally, lies beyond the province of Mendelism. Mendelism deals with results already achieved by Evolution, and not with the creative process by which they are achieved. No doubt it may and in due course will incidentally throw important sidelights on the mysterious creative process; but it will probably be no more than sidelights. In other words, Mendelism is not the real method or path of organic Evolution, but at best only an important side-track. This is not intended as a reflection on the science of Genetics, but only to place it in a proper perspective in the whole field of organic Evolution.

Having ruled out Mendelism, can we accept De Vries' Mutation as the ordinary method of Creative Evolution? Mutation takes place when specific or varietal characters appear, not as the result of n slow age-long summation of small variations, but at one bound, with a great leap of one generation to the next. An individual of species X produces offspring which constitute a stable variety or a new species De Vries saw this happening in the case of cultivated Enothera lamarckiana growing wild in a potato-field at Hilversum in Holland. Other instances have been observed by other investigators. It is objected that De Vries' CEnothera was a cultivated artificial hybrid, with mixed qualities, like the ab’s of the Mendelians, and that all he observed was the emergence of pure qualities from this mixture; in other words, hot the emergence of new characters but the setting free and unmasking of concealed or latent characters already existing. Other criticisms also have been levelled at the Mutation theory which it is not necessary for our purpose to consider here. In spite of these criticisms it is practically certain that mutations do take place in the course of Evolution. But while they almost certainly happen on occasion, they are not common and do not constitute the ordinary method of organic Evolution. On rare occasions there is a saltus, a creative leap forward from one generation to another. A species having long balanced itself precariously on the edge of a great change suddenly makes the jump, secures a foothold on the edge of the other side, and marks the beginning of a new variety or species. But it can at best only be an exceptional if not a rare effort on the part of Nature. These sudden long jumps can only be very occasional, and hot the normal course or procedure in the origin of species. Otherwise we would certainly see more of them, and they would not be the subject of doubt or dispute. The rarity of their observation points to the rarity of their occurrence. And they must be largely confined to cultivated artificial species or varieties which are more unstable and violently variable than natural species or varieties. Mutation in wild nature is an occasional and exceptional occurrence, and is not the ordinary procedure of Evolution.1

1 Professor J. P. Lotsy, who bases Evolution on hybridisation between varieties and species, and has made a survey of the flora of several countries from this point of view, has come to the conclusion that hybrids are by no means uncommon in Nature, and that a fair percentage of natural species, usually classed as such, are really hybrids. Both Mendelian and experimental species such as those which T. H. Morgan habred in the fruit-fly Drosophila are held by Lotsy to be nothing but hybrids.

According to the views prevailing at present, the chromosomes of the dividing nucleus have been identified as on the whole the carriers of the hereditary characters of organisms; these characters have to some extent been correlated with distinct chromosomes, and the number, shape, size and other differences of chromosomes in the nucleus of the germ-cell are therefore taken to be the physical basis of the characters which distinguish the species. It has been found necessary to go further and to assume in the chromosomes themselves active elements or factors or genes which are productive of organic characters. These researches and speculations are still in their initial stages, but they are important and have this advantage, that the results of intercrossing and hybridising in producing a.change of characters can be studied in conjunction with the simultaneous change in number and form of chromosomes. In the prosecution of experimental Evolution the parallelism of cell structure and of variation in organic characters thus supplies a double weapon of attack. The phenotype and the genotype can be studied together.

But the question still remains how this mechanism of heredity operates as the sole and independent cause of Variation. The intermixture of chromosomes from two separate individuals in sexual reproduction, and the changes in the chromosome contents of the reproductive cells in their previous meiotic division, undoubtedly provide the occasion for a great intermixture of parental elements and are thus potent sources of Variation. But Variation operates even apart from and in the absence of sexualreproduction and the related meiotic divisions of the germ-cells. And the question remains whether the individual life is, in fact, so isolated from the germ-cell that it has no influence on the latter.and the resulting offspring. On this isolation most biologists are particularly insistent. The principle of the non-fransmissibility of organic modifications (as above defined) is a fixed dogma, based both on the gene theory and on empirical experience, as no clear and indisputable case of the passing of such individual modifications to the offspring has been recorded or observed.

There can, however, be little doubt that in adopting this extreme standpoint the current theory goes too far. For thus it becomes impossible to understand the double fact of progress and adaptation; in other words, to understand how the experience of the race, which after all is only accumulated individual experience, helps to promote development, and to mould it in congruity with the environment. Unless the " trial and error " experiments of individuals produce some racial result; if, in other words, every individual throughout the ages has to begin to learn once more at the beginning, organic progress becomes unintelligible, if not impossible.

The dilemma is indeed a most formidable one for the Theory of Evolution. On the one hand, there is the negative evidence, the absence of any clear and incontrovertible case where mere individual modifications have been transmitted to offspring. On the other hand, there are the very numerous cases where the disappearance of certain characters can only be satisfactorily explained on the assumption that modifications due to disuse of an organ have become hereditary.  Again, there are the still more numerous cases where parts of the body have been constantly used in certain ways and have finally become specialised organs with which animals are now born ready-made. There is also the class of cases mentioned by Herbert Spencer in his controversy with Weismann and never satisfactorily answered, where, for instance, the sensitiveness of the finger or tongue (now hereditary) is compared with the much smaller sensitiveness of the back or other parts of the body, which have never been used as an organ of touch or taste. Above all, there is the difficulty, one might almost say the impossibility, of understanding organic Evolution, if its advance depends upon mere fortuitous variations in reproduction, and remains uninfluenced by the work, the experience, the learning through trial and error and the consequent modifications of the individuals which compose a race or species. While it is admitted and intelligible that mere artificial and singular modifications, such as cutting off the tails of dogs or sheep continuously for thousands of years, will have no germinal and no hereditary effect, the case may apparently be quite different with modifications which are due to the frequent or constant activity of the animal, and which register the routine of its life. Such modifications are far more intimate to the animal organism, and may in the course of time produce such a deep impression on the body-cells as to penetrate to and reach even the germ-cells, and register a change there which leads thereafter to hereditary and apparently spontaneous variation. There is nothing in principle directly negativing such an assumption, and it does render intelligible the progressive evolution and specialisation of bodily organs which on any other assumption it is most difficult to understand. The absence of direct experimental evidence in support of this view is not a fatal objection. The laboratory of Nature is very different from that of experimental research. Life, has not been made in the latter but was made in the former. The slow intimate operations extending over thousands and even millions of years, such as brought about most of the organic species of which we know, are not on a par with our latter-day researches in experimental evolution. Here the time factor is all-important. With all our chemical knowledge we can yet never hope to rival in our laboratories the results which Nature has through the countless ages achieved, say, in the crucible of the geological record. Still less can we hope to achieve through biological experiments in the laboratory what her silent processes have amounted to through millions of years.1

1 Even so, however, some experimental evidence seems to be forthcoming. In this connection-the recent work of Harrison and others on Melanism in moths is very important. It was found that among English native moths species after species with pale ground colour gave rise to forms so heavily pigmented that they appeared in some cases to be dark grey and in others perfectly black. This melanism has been found in the coal areas of England, Germany and even at Pittsburgh in the United States. The foliage of trees in the English area was found to contain relatively large quantities of salts of manganese, iron and other metals. Moths reared on food charged with a percentage of these compounds also developed melanism, which was transmitted to their offspring in the Mendelian ratios. So far as these significant experiments have gone, they tend to show that chemical changes in the environment of organisms may more readily lead to hereditary variations in them. In other words, migrations and other changes in habitat which lead to new sources and kinds of food may have an important bearing on the evolution of new characters and species. This chemical clue appears undoubtedly to be an important one and deserving of being more widely followed Up. (See Harrison's note in Nature, pp. 127-9, of 22nd January, 1927.)

If we set aside this negative and inconclusive evidence, we find nothing in theory or fact to preclude us from viewing modifications as having an indirect influence through more or less long biological periods on the germ-cells. On the hypothesis of the “field" which we have found useful before, we may consider these somatic modifications as in the first instance influencing the field of the germ-cells, and only later and in the course of time becoming incorporated from the field into the hereditary structure of the germ-cell.

We come thus in effect to look upon modifications as partly the material from which variations have been formed. Modifications due to constant use or disuse, or to permanent changes in the conditions of physical environment, influence in the first instance the field of the germ-cell, and are thus the earlier phase of the later hereditary structural variations. In fact we may say that modifications are to variations what variations are to specific characters. Throughout organic Nature we find this grand calculus at work, adding up -and conserving whatever in the experience and development of the individual is of survival value to the race, and carrying on this organic summation with a fineness and delicacy surpassing that of any mere mechanical calculus. What is not incorporated into the hereditary structure remains conserved in the invisible " field " until it is finally accentuated enough to become so incorporated. Nothing of value is lost--traces and residua of organic reactions, reflexes and tropisms, instincts and intelligence, all are conserved or registered in the field until in the lapse of time they are ready to become part of the physical structure. There is no reason, except our ignorance of the facts, why modifications should not thus to a large extent be the conditions precedent of variations. Only in this way can we explain why the trend of Variation is on the whole in harmony with the experience and the past of animate Nature, why Evolution makes steps in advance on the road on which it is already moving, instead of making incalculable twists and turns, as it might do if its course was merely dependent on purely accidental, arbitrary and unmotivated variations.

That modifications of a certain intimate bodily character, and continued through many generations, may in the end influence the germ-cells and even modify their hereditary structure is easier for us to appreciate than it was for Weismann. It is only recently that we have learnt to understand the important functions which the hormones given off by the ductless glands perform in the regulation and balance of our whole animal economy. We now know that the germ-cells, so far from being independent of the developed system of body-cells, have even apart from their reproductive functions a most intimate regulative effect in co-ordinating the functioning of the bodily system as a whole. If there is this open door between them, there is no reason why there may not be the reverse influence of the body-cells on the germ-cells.1

1 The recent experiments of Professor Pavlov on the associative memory of white mice are interesting, and though the correctness of their results has been doubted they indicate important clues to be followed up by further research. An electric bell was rung while the mice were feeding. It was found that a firm association was built up after this process had been repeated 300 times; that is to say, after that the mice looked for their food whenever the bell was rung. For the first generation offspring of these mice a less arduous lesson was necessary: after 150 rings the association was established. For the second generation offspring only 30 rings were necessary; while for the third filial generation only five rings were necessary to establish the association. In other words, the acquired experience of the parents made the acquisition of similar experience progressively easier for their off spring. An attempt to repeat these experiments is said to have failed. No conclusions can therefore be based on them for the present. Of course, should corroboration be forthcoming, these experiments would be most important as throwing light on Evolution as progressive facilitation of experience; in other words, on the inheritance of educability or psychic experience •.

This question of the way in which non-hereditary modifications are conserved brings us to another difficulty which Evolutionists have found it very hard to explain on the accepted Darwinian principles. I refer to the natural selection of small variations. How can small variations be selected and conserved in the struggle for existence until they are marked enough to become specific? To begin with, they are so small that it is difficult to understand that they have any survival value at all. Take an organ which is being differentiated from the rest of the body-cells. At the beginning any variation must be utterly insignificant and practi cally valueless in the struggle for life, and Natural Selection has really nothing to work on. How then could an animal with such a minute variation be selected as being more adapted to its environment? It is this awkward question which has led to the hypothesis that very marked varieties or mutations alone are selected. Various more or less ingenious attempts have been made to answer this question, but to my mind they are all more or less unsatisfactory. The result is that we cannot understand how the Darwinian machinery of Natural Selection is set in motion in any particular case. Once individuals with marked specific or varietal differences exist in superabundance, we can understand why the struggle for existence between them will take place and Natural Selection become operative. But on Darwinian principles as. ordinarily understood these marked differences between individuals can only arise from a prior selection as between variations so minute that there is apparently nothing sufficiently substantive for Natural Selection to work on. In other words, Natural Selection will move all right when once set in motion, but Darwinism fails to set it in motion. spring. An attempt to repeat these experiments is said to have failed. No conclusions can therefore be based on them for the present. Of course, should corroboration be forthcoming, these experiments would be most important as throwing light on Evolution as progressive facilitation of experience; in other words, on the inheritance of educability or psychic experience

In my view the difficulty can only be satisfactorily removed by the principle of Holism, as I shall just now proceed to explain. In the meantime, however, I wish to point out how my suggestion that the modifications influence the field of germ-cells and prepare the way for variations can prove helpful to Darwinism in its plight. According to that suggestion the small initial variation does not stand by itself, and on its own merits, so to speak. It appears powerfully supported in the struggle for existence. Individual 'use and practice for very many generations are on its side. It does not appear as a stray, helpless infant in a hostile world. It appears in a friendly, one might say, in a prepared universe. It has a stalwart nurse in the use and routine of the individual in whom it appears. It is protected, shielded and in its struggle reinforced, by this constant use and routine. A small variation in the direction of a nascent organ, for instance, finds itself in line with the traditional use of generations of individuals which powerfully support it in the struggle with contrary variations. Under the shelter of this use it develops and beats its competitors, until in the end it can fend for itself and engage in the struggle on its own account.

This explanation applies not only to variations in developing organs which are supported by use and practice on the part of adong line of individuals. It applies also to cases where permanent changes in the physical conditions impress themselves continuously on the organism. The growthforms of plants, for instance, under particular ecological conditions are such as almost to render necessary the view that ecological modifications, due to the direct, silent, long continued pressure of the environment, finally become variations. The sameness or close resemblance of the growth-forms under the same physical conditions, as seen, for instance, in the general characters of formations and associations in the vegetable kingdom, is probably in a measure due to the age-long operation of ecological factors which have impressed themselves on plant development and have produced modifications which finally have become variations.1

1 Thus Professor F. O. Bower in Evolution in the Light of Modern Knowledge (p. 206), after discussing the evolutionary structures of ferns, continues: " It would seem a natural interpretation of the facts that the characters (under discussion), acquired by a direct impress upon a succession of individual lives, should have been imposed hereditarily upon each race. Naturally the reply may be made that probably mutations favourable to the perpetuation of the imposed character may have made that character permanent. If we grant that, do we not thereby simply admit that the distinction between fluctuating variations and mutations 'is not absolute? In other words, that fluctuating variations repeatedly imposed upon successive generations are liable to become mutations? It is difficult to see any other rational explanation of the wide-reaching facts of homoplastic adaptation, such as are shown with exceptional profusion in the ancient class of the ferns, and are evident in plants at large." (In this quotation fluctuating variations correspond to what have above been called modifications, while mutations correspond to what have been called variations.) The experiments of Kammerer and Durkhen on animals and plants would seem to tend in the same direction. But they require further corroboration, and have been called seriously in question.

The resulting general features of formations and associations are no doubt in part due to Natural Selection, but in part the physical environment has probably exercised a direct pressure all its own and produced an effect which has powerfully reinforced the results of Natural Selection. The hereditary variation ultimately appears, but it does so not accidentally or from the blue, but from the long-continued stimulus of environmental conditions which have influenced and affected the field of the germ-cell.

While some variations thus have their roots in the traditional use and practice of individuals or in the conditions of the physical environment, and can survive under the protection thus afforded them, many variations cannot be thus accounted for, and probably originate in what appears to us as a spontaneous, independent, more or less sudden and accidental manner. The mode of their selection and survival has still to be accounted for. Before doing so it is advisable to mention a third set of difficulties which Darwinism encounters in its explanation of organic Evolution. I refer to the phenomena of co-ordination and co-adaptation of organs and characters which it is almost impossible to account for satisfactorily on orthodox Darwinian lines.

I have hitherto spoken of variations as if they came singly in the evolution of organisms. But they do appear but rarely as single units. Generally they appear in associated groups. A small variation is generally found to be accompanied by a number of still smaller associated variations. If an organ varies, the associated muscles, nerves and other body-cells undergo a corresponding variation. The evolution of the horns of a wild beast, for instance, means minor and consequential adjustments to its head, its neck, its muscular system, the development of the forepart of the body, and its relation to the back parts, as well as to many other parts and details of its body. And when we come to consider the question, already so difficult, of the selection of a small variation in respect of such a horn, we are confronted with the still more hopeless difficulty of having at the same time to account for many other minor correlated variations, each of which has to be selected. Besides this, there is their joint and associated use or functioning which has also to be accounted for as a factor in their selection. We are obviously throwing a weight on the principle of Natural Selection which is more than it can bear. It is being arbitrarily and artificially applied far beyond the area of its natural and proper application. And here it is where Natural Selection breaks down completely. The whole body is a system of co-ordinated structures and functions, and its origin and development can only be represented as a complex movement forward in time of a mass of associated variations which have resulted in the most marvellous co-adaptation of structures and co-ordinated functions. Before the problem of this complex yet orderly evolution, Natural Selection stands baffled.,It can deal with individuals and markedly formed and developed characters, but not with their delicately adjusted and associated infinitesimals.

The fault, however, lies not so much'with Natural Selection, as with our fundamental organic conceptions. Our crude uncritical mechanistic conceptions are the real source of the difficulty, and Holism appears to me to be the way out. The root of the error lies in our disregard of the individual organism as a living whole, and in our attempt to isolate characters from this whole and study them separately, as if they were mere mechanical components of this whole. The fatal mistake involved in this procedure has already been fully exposed in previous chapters. The whole is not a mechanical aggregate indifferent to and without influence on its parts. It is itself an active factor in controlling and shaping the functions of its parts. The parts bear the impress of its directive influence, without and apart from which it is vain to speculate on their characters and their activities. Whereas mechanical action is isolable and additive, so that the total activities of a system are represented by the sum of all the individual activities, the situation is entirely different in the case of a living whole. Here all action, as we have seen, is holistic, not only that of the whole itself, but also that of the parts. The stamp of Holism is impressed on the activities of the parts no less than on the individual whole itself. The individual and its parts are reciprocally means and end to one another; neither is merely self-regarding, but each supports the other in the moving dynamic equilibrium which is called life. And so it happens that the central control of the whole also maintains qnd assists the parts, and the functions of the parts are ever directed towards the conservation and fulfilment of the whole. With this conception of living- unity and holistic action in an organism before us, let us try once more to read. the riddle of Variation and Natural Selection as the twin factors in Evolution.

In the first place we realise that each individual organism is a unitary system whose inmost nature is its own balanced self-maintenance and self-development as a whole. Heredity is but the expression of this self-conservative character. The organism both as structure and field, while carrying with it the past which is its expressed self, also carries with it the still unrealised future which flows organically from that past, and it maintains a living, moving harmony between the two; its presently existing self is the more or less harmonious realisation of the organic unity of its past and its future, in its present. Variations arise as the tentacles it throws out under environmental stimulation towards the future, a stretching of hands dimly and unconsciously towards future adjustment, welfare and betterment. These variations, while apparently accidental and uncontrolled, arise from the stimulus of the environment and are under the central control of the organism as a whole.

Let us for a moment consider the appearance of a small variation. It is really neither spontaneous nor accidental. It is the expression of the moving, developing organism as a whole in a particular direction. It is normally conditioned by what has gone before in the history of the organism and is really of a piece with the organism as a whole. Nor does it as. a rule appear alone. The organism as a whole is on the march, and while the variation may be the first and most significant indication of the inner movement, the advance is not confined to a single point, but is represented by a curve of progress on which other minor advances are registered at the same time. Thus variation A when closely scanned will be seen to be really more like A + b + c + d where b, c and d represent minor variations which adjust A in various respects to the organism. The apparently isolated variation is seen to be what it really is, an advance of the organism as a whole in a particular direction, a holistic as distinguished from a singular and mechanical variation or change. Mechanical analogies may assist us to understand to some extent what happens. A mechanical system of a given number of elements in equilibrium is given a push or blow with a certain force in a certain direction. When it has recovered from the push or blow and is in equilibrium once more, it will be found that the change is not merely in the direction in which the force was applied, but that all the other elements have also been affected and have undergone adjustments.in order to achieve the new equilibrium. The same happens, only much more intensely and intimately and organically, in the case of a change in a living whole. Variation A necessarily involves a number of collateral adjustments which are dependent on A, and are not independently originated or conserved. In other words, holistic variation or variation of a whole in any particular respect is the cause and carrier of minor variations which are not independently selected or conserved, and for which Natural Selection need not, therefore, be called into action. It is really the whole which does the " selection " in thte exercise of its central control. We may call it a case of Holistic Selection as distinguished from external Natural Selection. Variation A of the whole, which is the expression of an inner urge of the whole and is therefore supported by the whole, carries with it the minor and consequential adjustments involved in variations b, c and d.

This explains one of the main difficulties which we encountered above--the question, that is to say, of the selective co-ordination of subsidiary adjustments. But the main difficulty remains how variation A itself is selected after its appearance. How is the main small variation, perhaps too insignificant for Natural Selection to get a grip on, selected and conserved in the holistic system? If it were a mere accidental appearance, with nothing more behind it, it might be a toss up whether it is saved or lost, and generally it is lost. With the prodigality of life itself, organic changes are scattered broadcast like seeds, and most of them, with nothing particular in the urge of the organism behind them to give them continuous momentum, perish as soon as they are born. But some are in a different position; they are in the main direction of development, they are on the road, so to say, on which the organism is travelling; they have the whole weight of the organism behind them; they are nursed and cared for, figuratively speaking; and in the end they survive. Once more a case of Holistic Selection as distinct from Natural Selection. And sometimes in these cases, as we have seen, the organism has long before the appearance of the variation begun to move in its direction. The functioning of the organism has anticipated its future structure. It Jias for many generations devoted a part of itself to a particular qse; the part has in consequence undergone modification; from an undifferentiated system of cells it has been modified in certain respects so as to anticipate an organ. When finally in the course of time this modification is superseded by and merged into an organic variation, it is in direct harmony with the needs and the practice of- the organism as a whole; the practice continues along with the variation and becomes accentuated, the pressure of the needs of the organism is behind the variation and probably increases; and the variation, covered by the habitual practice of the organism, and urged forward by the organic needs, makes headway and has a fair chance of survival. It has a distinct advantage; the dice are loaded in its favour by the nature, pressure and practice of the organism as a whole. These forces behind it are probably strong enough to keep it going, though only at the very slow pace at which all biologicalEvolution moves. Eventually, when it has developed enough to add a sensible measure of strength to the parent organism, it will reward its parent for its secular support, it will join forces with it, and fight a victorious battle against its competitors. At this stage the belated force of Natural Selection has arrived on the scene. But not earlier, the earlier phases having depended on what I call Holistic Selection.

The Holistic Selection which acts within each organism in respect xof its parts inter se is essentially different from the Natural Selection which.operates between different organisms, which is more appropriately called the struggle for existence. Holistic Selection is much more subtle in its operation, and is much more social and friendly in its activity; it puts the inner resources of the organism behind the promising variation, however weak and feeble it may be in comparison with other characters, and makes it win through powerful backing rather than throughThe ruthless scrapping of the less desirable variations. In the organism the battle is not always to the strong, nor is the struggle an unregulated scrimmage in which the most virile survive. The whole is all the time on the scene as an active friendly p arbiter and regulator, and its favours go to those variations which are along the road of its own development, efficiency and perfection.

The continuous Holistic Selection of small variations may be compared to the survival of obsolete organs in an organism. Both are carried forward by the organism as a whole, perhaps for millions of years, without being in either case directly useful to the organism. The whole, to speak metaphorically, takes long views, both into the future and into the past; and mere considerations of present utility do not weigh very heavily with it. It carries its infant variation with it in the same way that it carries the aged and dying `members or atrophying organs. Both are borne along, covered and shielded by the main characters of the organism. From the point of view of survival value, as from so many other points of view, the whole is more important than any of its parts. And so it comes that the organism is a most complicated system, a present living unity embodying its far-away past no less than its dim distant future. The whole controls, guides and conserves all. The fate of any particular part, considered by itself and on its own merits, would be an inexplicable mystery, and might be expected to be the very opposite of what happens in practice. When, however, it is viewed from its position and function in the whole, the mystery is. explained; we see how different the laws of life are from the laws of mechanics, and how wrong it is to apply mechanistic and atomistic conceptions in a region where Holism prevails.

To understand how a small variation is favoured, we may represent an organism as a moving developing equilibrium, which is never perfectly adjusted because it has a persistent slight overbalance in the direction of development. Complete equilibrium is never attained, and would be fatal if it were attained, as it would mean stagnation, atrophy atid death. And so the overbalance in a certain direction or with a definite orientation continues indefinitely, and all small developments and adjustments and " variations " which have that specific orientation have the momentum of the whole behind them and tend to survive and grow while others in other directions are dropped and discarded. One may accordingly say that in each case " the whole " is a co-worker with its small variations which will eventually be 'useful; that as an active factor its influence is on the side of such small variations, and that with this inner nurture and support these small variations are in their infant stages practically independent of external support for their survival and steady evolution.

The activity of the whole is seen not only in the maintenance and evolution of the small variation and all the subordinate adjustments that go with it, but also and especially in all the innumerable co-ordinations and co-adaptations in structure and function which constitute a living organism, I believe -it is generally admitted that this phenomenon of organic co-ordination is one which cannot be satisfactorily explained on mechanical principles. The functioning of an animal as a whole has something unique about it, and the term " whole " in this connection is no mere phrase but a fact of vital significance. We have already considered the matter fully in Chapter VI. Here we shall only add that to suppose that Natural Selection has not only brought about the separate organs of animals and their functions, but also accounts satisfactorily for their adjustments to each other and their co-ordinated activities in the animal behaviour, is to suppose what certainly has never been and cannot be explained in detail, and what probably is in conflict with the facts of development. Intelligent and purposive action of a human or other animal cannot be explained on mechanical principles; nor can instinctive action, not even reflex or organic activities and functions below the level of instinct or intelligence. An animal--even of the lowest type--makes an unconscious effort to catch food or beat an enemy, and in the process performs a large number of acts which are all effectively co-ordinated towards the attainment of its object. No mechanical explanation of this process of co-ordinated movements has ever been given. The animal acts as a whole, with a unity and effectiveness of action which is no mere mechanical composition of its movements. The concept of the whole is the only category that will explain such unity. Co-ordination and co-adaptation in organic structure and behaviour cannot be explained on any other ground.

So far we have considered Holism as inclusive of variations; as a process regulating find co-ordinating groups of actualised variations and organic characters generally. But this by no means exhausts the scope of Holism in organic development. It includes not only production of variations, but just as much repression of variations. Holism is as often inhibitive as creative; certain characters are held back at the same time that others are pushed forward, and in this way a balanced movement and progress of the organic whole is secured. When, for instance, the form and characteristics of a gorilla are compared with the human type it becomes clear that in the human evolution certain tendencies have been held definitely in check, and the utter caricature in appearance, which would have resulted from unrestrained development, has thus been prevented. Nobody who ignores this negative aspect of Evolution can possibly understand the present forms of animals, compared with their living or fossil affiliations. Tendencies to variation, which were realised in the case of Neanderthal man, have been more or less severely repressed in the present human races. If there had been unrestrained evolution of all potential variations, the results would have been truly dreadful in their grotesqueness. In fact we find at work in organic Evolution an influence not unlike that which at a much later stage we recognise as the ethical control of feelings, impulses and instinctive movements of an undesirable character. The whole in personality, the whole in its ethical flowering in the human, means not only expression of certain moral qualities, but also and equally repression of others. Elements and tendencies which we find strongly operative in our instinctive or organic nature we have to keep in check, to hold down severely, and to prevent from emergence in our characters as a whole. This is the very essence of Holism in its mature ethical development. There is something very similar and equally fundamental in the activity of Holism in the earlier purely organic phases of Evolution. In any individual organism the whole is in control, pushing forward some tendencies and keeping back others, expressing some variations and repressing others, -and through all maintaining a mobile equilibrium of all the elements, positive and negative, that are uniquely blended in the individual. Thus it is that if we wish to understand the details of organic Evolution in any particular case we should look for the repressions no less than for the variations; it is the combination of the two which constitutes Evolution.

I shall no doubt be asked what experimental verification there is for the holistic view of Evolution here set forth. My answer is to repeat what I have already said: that natural Evolution as distinguished from experimental Evolution is a process, not of the hour or the day, but of geological time, and that the results, matured and consolidated through immemorial periods, cannot be repeated or rehearsed by short-dated laboratory experiments, conducted too under conditions very different from those of Nature. These experiments, however valuable and instructive in affording subsidiary clues and hints of the natural process, do not by any means exhaust or even seriously affect the real problem of creative Evolution; and a correct view of Evolution must have regard to this difference and be based on an intelligent appreciation of the natural processes rather than on the very limited data yielded by our laboratory experiments. There is no doubt that experimental Evolutioii has, through its unavoidable limitations, greatly blurred the great Darwinian vision of organic Evolution, and instead of making us more fully realise its truth and effectiveness and grandeur as a whole, has tended to deflect our attention to particular problems which are special and limited enough to be capable of laboratory treatment. The special and exceptional cases of Mutation and Hybridisation come to be looked upon as covering the entire process of organic Evolution. My endeavour in this chapter has been, through a re-examination of the position thus created, 'to explore and reconnoitre a way back to the broader and wider view of Evolution. And in doing so I have sought the assistance of a concept which we have found at work, not only in organic Evolution, but in all organic structures and processes and even, to a limited extent, in inorganic Nature itself. I shall now briefly summarise the results we have reached in this chapter in order thus to see how they bear on the wide Darwinian conception from which we started.

The relative importance of the internal and external factors in Evolution has materially altered- since Darwin's time. Variation has become much more important than Natural Selection, not only in biological studies and experimental researches, but also in our view of it as an operative factor in organic Evolution. While remaining a substantial and important factor Natural Selection has yielded pride of place to Variation. The factor of intense struggle and competition in Nature on which Darwin, following the Malthusian clue, laid so much stress' is now seen not only to have less importance relatively, but also to bear a somewhat different character from wha? it had in Darwin's view. The struggle for existence is, like Mutation, an exceptional and not the usual procedure of organic Nature. This world is at bottom a friendly universe, in which organised tolerant co-existence is the rule and destructive warfare the exception, resorted to only when the balance of Nature is seriously disturbed. Normally Natural Selection takes the form of comradeship, of social cooperation and mutual help. Normally also the organic struggle is very much in abeyance, and the silent, effortless, constant pressure of the physical and organic environment exercises a very powerful influence. The young science of Ecology has been built up since Darwin's time and is based 7 on the recognition of this fact, that, in addition to the operation of Natural Selection, the environment has a silent, assimilative, transformative influence of a very profound and enduring character on all organic life. -In the subtle ways of Nature, sun and earth, night and day, and all the things of earth and air and sea mingle silently with life, sink into it and become part of its structure. And in response to this profound stimulus life grows and evolves, the lesser whole in harmony with the greater whole of Nature.

The interaction between the inner and the outer factors in Evolution is far more close and subtle than one would infer from Darwinism, either in its earlier or its later Genetic form. It is not merely a case of one factor creating variations, and another eliminating some of these creations and leaving free the rest, which are then said to be selected for perpetuation. The inner creative factor in a measure acts directly under the stimulus of. the external factor, and the variations which emerge are the result of this intimate interaction. The isolation of the inner from the outer factor, so much emphasised by Mendelians, is, in spite of its apparent agreement with observation, really a mistaken assumption, based on the neglect of the factor of time in Evolution. Environment is a great stimulus of variation, and even more so is the somatic organism itself, which is closer to the germ-cell than the environment.

We can only understand the process of organic Evolution if we assume that, deeply as the germ-cell carriers of Variation are hid from external contacts, they are not completely or for ever isolated therefrom; that changes due to habitual behaviour or to environmental or chemical or ecological pressure affect the " field " of the germ-cells, and if sufficiently longcontinued and intense, sooner or later penetrate the structures of these germ-cells, and stimulate and set in motion the internal factor of Variation. The response comes back in a crisis of variation or mutation which permanently alters the internal hereditary structure. In these cases the inner and outer factors of Evolution do not operate independently and by opposed and contrasted methods; they collaborate in the closest manner as the stimulus and response which we find distinctive of all organic action. From this external factor, which operates as a stimulus of organic variation, we have 2l6 to distinguish Darwin's Natural Selection, which is another external factor operative not in connection with the stimulation of variations, but in connection with their subsequent elimination or destruction, and acting like a sieve through which all life has to pass on pain of destruction. The external factors in Evolution are therefore according to this view twofold; the environmental or ecological factor which to some extent influences or induces variation, and the factor of organic struggle which sets in motion the warfare among organisms for the limited goods of life, which Darwin called Natural Selection.

But it is only in certain classes of cases that the " use " factor or the external or ecological stimulus of variation comes into action; in others the stimulus of variation is entirely internal, and must be found in the fresh mixture and readjustment of the chromatin elements of the germ-cell nucleus at certain critical stages in the evolutionary process, such as in the sexual reproduction of some organisms, or the endomixis and rejuvenescence which occur at certain stages in others.

This internal factor in Variation and Evolution has supplied a suggestive clue for researches in Genetics. But the view of this factor as purely mechanical must lead to great difficulties in detail, and make it impossible to understand the process of organic Evolution as a whole. I have therefore endeavoured to stress the contrary view of this inner factor, and to show that it is holistic in character and operation, that it thus solves the difficulties which the mechanistic hypothesis has created for itself, and that it leads to a reconciliation of the two factors operative in Evolution. The theory of Holism has thus once more, though in a way different from that envisaged by Darwin, brought us back to the great Darwinian vision of universal adaptation.1

1 I am afraid that the current " gene " theory, especially as it is being worked out and applied by Professor T. H. Morgan and others in their important researches, is far too deeply tainted with mechanistic elements. They search for organic change in individual genes rather than in the intra-organic field or milieu of interacting and mutually modifying functionings. There may soon be more of the hypothetical " genes " than the nucleus or the chromosomes can bear. Here too the concept of the whole as the centre and source of modifications in a network of connected influences and functions may appear as the way out of the difficulty. The organic or holistic concept should be applied in all its subtle implication and should not be translated into a sort of chemistry of genes

But it has done more; it has enabled us to realise the pervasive creative unity which makes all the diverse elements of existence the co-operative members and inhabitants of an essentially friendly universe. Operating as the inner creative factor at the heart of things, it has led to the evolution of a universe in which all the factors and products, organic and inorganic alike, are not alien to and destructive of each other, but are capable of mutual adaptation and adjustment, just because they own a common origin and have an indisputable, though often scarcely recognisable, family relationship. This is not to assume a Pre-established Harmony, which would be as great a mistake in one direction as the contrary and more usual mechanistic assumption--that universal adaptation and organic co-ordination are in effect the accidental results of utterly unconnected factors--would be in the other direction. The true conception not only for philosophy but also for science is that of parts, elements or aspects in a whole. It is the high task of science to explore the mechanisms of adaptation and variation in all their details, and to pursue at all costs the chemistry and physics of the cell, of which we still know so little. But it must dd so in the light of the unifying, regulating, co-ordinating activity of the holistic factor which, even from a purely scientific point of view, is just as important as the study of the special mechanisms. Above all, biological science must ever keep before itself the standpoint of the whole, without and apart from which all the details--so far from being recognised as being organic to each other-- are mere loose meaningless items, like the sands of the seashore, utterly useless for the understanding of that unique unity which constitutes an organic individual. The whole is the ultimate category of organic explanation, as it is the. ultimate feature of organic adaptation and evolution. Nay, more: Holism is also creative of all values. Take the case of organic Beauty. It is undeniable that Beauty rests on a holistic basis. Beauty is essentially a product of Holism and is inexplicable apart from it. Beauty is of the whole; Beauty is a relation of parts in a whole, a blending of elements of form and 'colour, of foreground and background, of expression and suggestion, of structure and function, of structure and field, which is perceived and appreciated as harmonious and satisfying, according to laws which it is for Esthetics to determine.

It may be a question how far the phenomena of repression in conjunction with expression in organic Evolution, of regulated development as a whole, of beauty and of similar phenomena can be properly subsumed under the Darwinian factors. Perhaps it is better to recognise that there is something wider and deeper at work in Evolution than the factors as found by Darwin and his successors, something of which those factors are themselves but an expression. The whole is itself an active feature or factor, and its activity as such explains phenomena which it is difficult if not impossible to account for in any 'other way without very forced interpretations. The inner sources of wealth and beauty in Nature are inexhaustible, and they are poured forth with a lavish hand in the creative process of Evolution. Not merely survival values on Darwinian lines count; 'on the foundation of variations with survival value is raised a superstructure of development which far transcends that narrow basis. Mind in its marvellous human efflorescence rests no doubt on a basis of survival value; but how much more it is than that! The glories of art and literature, the peace of the mystic religious experience, the creative Ideals which lift this life beyond the limitations of its lowly origin --all these experiences and developments have built a new spiritual world on the humble foundations of survival values. In the kingdom of life is visibly arising its capital, the City of God. Apart from the great human development, beauty in Nature tells the same tale. The song of birds, with its primary appeal to sex, but with so infinitely much more in it than the mere sex-appeal; the glorious forms and colouring of birds and beasts and insects, which no doubt rise in and from the struggle for existence, but finally rise above it, and rob it of all its sordidness and drabness; above all, the wonder of plants and flowers, which were meant for the eye of birds and insects, but which contain so infinitely much more than the eye of bird or insect ever beheld or ever can behold--it is everywhere in Nature the same. Everywhere we see the great overplus of the whole. So little is asked; so much more is given. The female only asks for a sign to recognise the male, and to help her to select him and enjoy him in preference to others. And for answer she gets an overpowering revelation of beauty out of all proportion to her modest request. The peahen has no discriminating understanding of the wondrous colouring of the peacock, which far transcends even our human powers; but in some inscrutable way something of an emotional nature in her takes it all in and is satisfied. It is deep calling unto deep; it is the whole appealing to the whole. There is evidently more in all this than the Darwinian factors can satisfactorily explain, and it would be both foolish and unscientific not to recognise this frankly. To me the conclusion of the matter is that the inexhaustible whole is itself at work, that Holism is an active factor influencing and interacting with the particular Darwinian factors, that not only its trend but also its output far exceed the immediate present utilities and needs of organic Evolution, and that its bow is bent for distant horizons, far beyond all human power of vision and understanding.
