---
title: "The Reformed Concept of Matter"
chapter: 3
---

Summary: Coming now from the Space-Time continuum to Matter we find the feature of structure much more conspicuous and important. The physical and chemical constitution of matter is almost entirely a matter of structure. Chemistry has traced matter to its ultimate units or atoms, and to the combination of these into molecules and substances according to structural schemes dependent on the placing and spacing of the different units in various chemical combinations. The New Physics has carried the process a step further back by analysing atoms into their constituent electrons and protons, or units of negative and positive electricity. In our picture of fundamental matter these units are so arranged structurally as to approximate to the form of more or less complicated solar systems, with central positive nuclei and revolving planetary electrons. The explanation of the physical and chemical properties of matter has been traced to the structural arrangements in these atomic systems and the number and changes in position of their various units. Matter is thus a structure of energy units revolving with immense velocities in Space-Time, and the various elements arise from the number and arrangement of the units in an atom; as these can be varied, the transmutation of elements becomes possible, as in Radioactivity. The peculiar serial character of the Periodic Table of the elements is thus due to the number of units and their architecture in the atoms. Atomic Weights and Atomic Numbers reflect this inner arithmetical character of atoms.

The states of matter, as gaseous, liquid or solid, are also the results of the residual surface forces in atoms and molecules, due to their inner structure. Crystal structure is another result of inner atomic structure. But perhaps the most remarkable state of matter is a combination of the other states; this is called the colloid state, in which very minute particles of one material are dispersed throughout another. This colloid state is much more universal than is commonly thought, and is specially important because the protoplasm of cells is organised in this state. The minuteness of the dispersed particles means the exposure of a maximum surface area compared to their mass. These surfaces bring into play surface forces and show peculiar affinities or selective properties of various kinds, and in this way certain chemical and physical reactions are facilitated at these surfaces, which make them useful in the industries as well as in the processes of organic life. In fact, some reactions in the colloid state approximate strangely to the biological type.

From the above analysis of the structural energetic constitution of matter certain conclusions can be drawn which very much narrow the gulf between matter and life.

In the first place, the old view of matter as inert and passive disappears completely. Matter like life is intensely active; the difference is not between deadness and activity, but between two different kinds of activity. Through their common activities the fields of matter and life thus overlap and intermingle, and absolute separation disappears.

In the second place, Radioactivity in matter plays a somewhat analogous role to Organic Descent in life. Both render fluid the old fixed entities and forms; although the difference between them must not be minimised. Especially must it be recognised that Radioactivity is regressive, while Organic Descent is progressive. But this may be due to the extreme age of matter as compared with the youth of life in the history of the earth.

In the third place, the Periodic Table of Chemistry has a distinct resemblance to the Systems of Botany and Zoology; the concepts of families, genera and species could be applied to both. This shows that the characters of activity, plasticity and probably of development and genetic relationships apply to both the organic and inorganic domains.

In the fourth place, the structural character of matter indicates that it is also creative, not of its own stuff, but of the forms, arrangements and patterns which constitute all its value in the physical sphere. Just as life and mind are creative of values through the selective combinations and forms which they bring about, so matter also, instead of being dispersive, diffusive, and structureless, effects through its inner activities and forces structural groupings and combinations which are valuable, not merely to humans, but in the order of the universe. But for its dynamic structural creative character matter could not have been the mother of the universe.

In the fifth place, "the discreteness and discontinuity in matter, emphasised in the quantum, the atoms, etc., is the basis of the individual distinctness in life, which makes all living forms distinct individuals, of which no two are identical.

In the sixth place, matter in its colloid state in protoplasm discloses properties and manufactures substances, such as chlorophyll and haemoglobin, which are necessary for the functions of life, and which go far toward bridging the great gap between the two. In its colloid state we thus see matter reaching up to the very threshold of life. A great leap may have taken place across what remained as a gap. A great " mutation " may have occurred. But as life probably began on a much lower level than the lowest forms we know to-day, in the mutation may after all not have been so great. In any case a close scrutiny of the nature of matter, as revealed by the New Physics, and especially colloid chemistry, brings it very near to the concept of life.

LET us now proceed to consider how recent advances in our knowledge of the constitution of matter have emphasised the importance of this same feature of structure in the physical universe. Chemistry had for more than a century been exploring with great success the structure and constitution of matter, but the New Physics of Radioactivity has during the last generation proved a most powerful aid to Chemistry and led to discoveries which are little short of revolutionary. To Chemistry was due the analysis of matter into a certain number of elements, each with its own physical and chemical properties; the discovery of the atom as the ultimate unit of each element of matter; the union of atoms of each element into simple molecules of that element, and the union of atoms of various elements into compound molecules. The combinations of elements in definite quantitative proportions was explained as the union of one or more of the atoms of these elements with each other. From this it might be inferred that the combinations of Chemistry were like the combinations of Arithmetic, and that the whole numbers of Arithmetic might properly represent the atoms of Chemistry and their combinations into compounds. This inference has, however, only been actually verified by the recent physical discoveries. It was not only the fact of numerical or quantitative structure that was important to Chemistry; the spatial or positional structure of matter, the order of placing and spacing of the atoms in the chemical substance, the architecture of matter became almost equally important, and in many cases the properties of a substance could only be explained on the basis of its real or supposed inner structure and configuration. Thus molecules of carbon could be either coal or graphite or diamond, and this great dissimilarity in the same chemical substance was explained as the result of the difference of structure in the placing and spacing of the atoms in the carbon molecule. Sulphur and many other elements show a similar polymorphous or, as it is called, allotropic character. It was, however, when chemists had to explain the different characters of quite distinct chemical compounds, which yet had the same chemical composition, that the importance of " structure " and constitution became most highly accentuated. Such compounds are called isomers. So important is structure to matter that without it one may safely say that organic chemistry becomes unintelligible. The more complex the composition of substances (as in organic chemistry), the larger the number of permutations and combinations that are possible in the relative positions and placings of atoms or groups of atoms in the make-up of matter, the more important does the phenomenon of isomerism become, and the greater is the part played by structure and configuration in the building up of matter. The chemical' formula is no longer sufficient, it is a mere abstract notational shorthand which may be thoroughly misleading in the absence of a diagrammatic representation of the constitution or structure of the compound substance. The crystal forms of solids illustrate not only the structural character of chemical substances, but also the invariable way in which the same substance follows the same pattern of structure. To Chemistry structure, or the proper representation of relative positions and linkages of atoms or their groups in the three dimensions of space, has become indispensable. And the New Physics has now gone a step further and shown that this minute structure of the chemical atom and compound is not static in space, but dynamic and intensely active in that four dimensioned Space-Time continuum which we have already found dominant in the relations of astronomical bodies, and events. Space-Time prevails at both ends of physical infinity and everywhere between.

To Chemistry the atom was a hard indivisible unit, the constitution of which (if there was any) could not be known; nor could it explain chemical affinity or why atoms combined into molecules; nor could it explain the strange serial character of the Periodic Law in reference to the atomic weights and the properties of atoms These triumphs were reserved for the New Physics, and they have traced structure back into the innermost recesses of the atom. The discovery of Radioactivity by Becquerel in 1896 was the first indication that the atom was not indivisible and could break up spontaneously in nature. The discovery in the previous year of the X-rays by Rontgen for the first time revealed the existence of invisible rays whose wave-length was as small as atoms, and the spectrum of these rays has provided an instrument of incredible power and accuracy in the investigation of the almost infinitesimally small phenomena of atomic structure. Then followed in 1897 the isolation by Sir J. J. Thomson of the ultimate unit of negative electricity in the electron; and in 1900 Max Planck discovered what came to be known as the quantum, the unit of action emitted by all radiant bodies or even dark bodies. The application of these new ideas and means of investigation by a number of brilliant researchers has led to the elucidation of the nature and constitution of the atom of matter in the theory which is specially associated with the names of Sir Ernest Rutherford and Professor Niels Bohr. Without entering into details which do not concern us, and simply to illustrate the element of " structure " in the atom with which we are dealing, I shall summarise the salient points in this theory.1 According to it, an atom is an electrical constellation somewhat like our gravitational solar system; the centre of the system being a minute very massive nucleus positively electrified, round which revolve equally minute electrons or negative particles of very small mass--so small that in the Hydrogen atom, 1 This theory has been largely superseded by the new quantum mechanics associated mostly with the names of Schrodinger, Heisenberg, and Dirac, which dispenses with all planetary and other pictures of atomic structure and behaviour, and consists of purely mathematical principles explanatory of atomic phenomena. The feature of structure is, however, as markedly emphasised in the new theories as in the prior Rutherford-Bohr symbolism. for instance, the nucleus has 1835 times the mass of the electron. The electrons revolve at various rates in their different orbits, all of which can be measured through their X-ray spectrum; and an electron can suddenly and all at. once jump from one orbit to another, increasing its orbit when it receives one or more quanta of radiation from some outside body, or decreasing its orbit and taking one nearer the central nucleus, and in the act of doing so releasing one or more quanta of radiation. It is these quanta of radiation, released when the electron jumps to a narrower orbit in the atom, that account for the light which comes from the sun and the stars, and in fact all radiant bodies; and it is the definite quanta of radiation so emitted which account for the peculiar spectrum of the elements in the spectroscope. Why atomic light should be emitted in these definite amounts or quanta is not yet known, but it is known that the quanta shown in the spectrum follow a scale somewhat similar to the notes in music, and we may therefore think of light as the music of the spheres, in which the total harmony or light effect is made up""of definite discontinuous notes instead of continuous variations of light. The wonderful thing is that in regard to all these matters we have the most minute and accurate knowledge: the amount of a quantum; the mass, velocity and orbits of an electron; the mass and velocity of rotation of a nucleus, and the total sphere of an atom, with its small nucleus and electrons and vast empty spaces, comparable to the empty spaces in our solar system. The electron is by now very well known,1 and indeed all electric currents are nothing but streams of free electrons. But of the corresponding positive unit which is called a proton next to nothing is known, as the proton has never yet been isolated.2

Now the nucleus of in an atom may be simple or complex; it may be a proton, as in the case of the Hydrogen atom, or it may consist of several protons, some of which, again, may be neutralised by closely associated electrons, and some remain un-neutralised, so that the nucleus as a whole always remains positively electrified. In the Hydrogen atom there is one proton in the nucleus, and hence there is one electron revolving round it. In the Helium atom, again, there is a nucleus of four protons, two of which have electrons in association with them, and two not; the nucleus, therefore, has two positive units, to which correspond two electrons which revolve round the nucleus in the atom. The combination of four protons and two electrons in the Helium nucleus appears to persist in other nuclei, so that the nuclei of the other elements appear to be a combination of simple (Hydrogen) and complex (Helium) nuclei. The number of revolving electrons in an element always corresponds to the number of unsatisfied positive units in the nucleus, which is called the atomic number of the element, and which is always an integer; and thus the atomic numbers of the elements run from 1 in the case of Hydrogen to 2 in the case of Helium, 6 in the case of Carbon, and so on to 92 in the case of Uranium, the heaviest of all the known elements. Of these 92 possible elements, two have not yet been isolated, although their atomic numbers and weights and positions in the Periodic Table and their approximate properties are known. Atomic weights are in every case integers, the apparent exceptions being cases where we have to do with isotopes or elements of which the atoms are not all identically the same but slightly different in their electron and proton contents. Thus the New Physics has incidentally explained the mystery of the Periodic Table.

The mystery of the atom has now largely narrowed down to the nucleus, which consists of an inner revolving system of protons of which comparatively little is known except that they rotate round their centre with an enormous velocity-- probably not much less than that of light--and that the quantum law as well as the mass law of Relativity holds with regard to them. As space or volume contracts with velocity in Space-Time, the mass of the nucleus increases with high speeds out of all proportion to its size, and the positive nucleus of the atom is therefore its virtual mass, the rest of the atom being either empty space or very light insubstantial electrons. Owing to its massiveness the nucleus of protons is therefore coming to be identified with matter, as if matter were ultimately only high-speed densely massed positive electricity. The proton may thus yet prove to be the fundamental unit of matter. The significance of this view is that it reduces matter simply to a form of energy, or rather Action, and therefore. still further simplifies the scheme of the universe.

There is another fact which shows the intimate relation between energy on the one hand and structure or mass on the other. The mass or atomic weight of the free Hydrogen atom has been determined as 1.0077. In the Helium nucleus, as we have seen, there are four protons or Hydrogen nuclei, but here their mass only appears as one. In other words, the free Hydrogen atoms or protons (they are practically identical as regards mass) suffer a diminution of mass when they are concentrated into the Helium nucleus, as if in this nucleus, which is itself an inner constellation system, the protons and electrons are so close as to jam each other, and therefore move more slowly and thereby decrease their mass or matter. Energy of motion has become the lesser energy of position or potential energy. When the Helium nucleus is again split up into Hydrogen protons, this loss of mass or potential energy would be recoverable in the form of kinetic energy, which, small as it is in the Helium nucleus, must be enormous in the world, as in all matter the nuclei are composed either of Hydrogen protons or Helium protons (their compressed form) or both. Should this energy ever become economically available, the greatest potential source of energy in the universe will be opened up for the benefit or destruction of mankind.

This would involve the artificial breaking up of matter, and this is the phenomenon which we actually witness in a natural spontaneous form in Radioactivity. In Radioactivity the nuclei of the heavier elements (Uranium, Thorium, and Radium) spontaneously break up and eject Helium at an invariably slow rate, which is regular enough to be a geological clock, now being used as a measure to calculate the age of the oldest rock-formations of the earth.3

Thus the Periodic Table shows that the expulsion of three Helium atoms from Uranium will convert it through Thorium into Radium; the expulsion of one more Helium atom will convert Radium into an element called Radium Emanation; and so on until eight Helium atoms have been expelled, when Lead will be reached. If the process of expulsion could be continued, Mercury will next be reached, and next after that Gold. The alchemists were then not so far out when they guessed that Mercury could be transmuted into gold! Unfortunately (or rather, as a citizen of the greatest gold-producing country, I should say fortunately) this spontaneous breakup of matter has not yet been observed to proceed beyond lead. The artificial break-up of matter in the laboratory began in 'the experiments of Sir Ernest Rutherford, who by bombarding Nitrogen gas with a particles from Radium C has succeeded in splitting the Nitrogen atom into Hydrogen atoms and a residual apparent combination of Helium nuclei which might result in Carbon according to the Periodic Table, but which is more likely to split up into Helium atoms. This artificial destruction of the elements has now been extended to other cases. Whether it will ever become economically feasible is a question for the future to answer.

We have seen that the free positive charges of the nucleus have to be balanced by he corresponding number of negative electrons grouped in their orbits round the nucleus. On the number and grouping of these planetary electrons the external physical and chemical properties of the atom will depend. If the orbits followed impose a strain on the equilibrium of the atom, a quantum adjustment to a different orbit will be made. If the number of electrons and their orbit distributions produce complete equilibrium the atom will be very stable internally and inert or inactive externally; it will belong to one of the inert group (Helium, Argon, Neon, Krypton). On either side of this inert group of elements in the Periodic Table we find elements whose atoms have onc electron too many or too few; in other words, they are not internally in equilibrium and have a negative or positive charge unsatisfied; they will therefore combine with any other element which has an opposite charge unsatisfied. At another remove from the inert elements in the Periodic Table we find elements with two negative or positive charges unsatisfied, which will again combine with another element which has two opposite charges unsatisfied. And so on to the elements which have three, four or five charges unsatisfied. In this way both chemical affinity and the valency (mono-valency, di-valency, etc.) of the elements are accounted for. In every case the external properties of the element are simply the expression of its internal structured and its condition of stable or unstable equilibrium in respect of its inner elements.

Not only the combination of atoms into molecules, but the formation of the most complex compounds rests on this condition of unstable equilibrium due to unsatisfied negative or positive charges in the combining elements. The compound, instead of being a single system of the solar type, is a far more complex affair, and represents the case where suns with their attendant planets again revolve round a greater central sun, or where several solar systems are linked together externally and not by a common centre. In either case the distribution and equilibrium of the moving internal electric units determine the structure of the substance as matter, as well as its physical and chemical properties, while the movements of the substance as a whole and of its parts relatively to each other create the gravitational field or curved Space-Time system which forms the medium and the field of the substance. There is thus structure through and through, not only in matter or the energies which in their extreme concentration and velocity assume the massive form of matter, but also in the field which surrounds this matter.

The gaseous, liquid and solid forms of matter are also the result of this inner condition of electrical stability in the atom and molecule. If the positive and negative charges are quite equal and properly distributed the result, as we have seen, is an inert element. And this element will also be a gas, as the inner satisfaction of the charges and balance of the system will make it inactive or inert externally. All gases are states of matter where the inner balance of equilibrium in the atoms and the molecules is such that there is no residual force to work externally; the atoms (in inert elements) and molecules (in others) therefore move freely and unhampered. If the inner balance of charges is not quite complete, there will be some external residual force as between the molecules, and the liquid state will result. If this inner satisfaction is lessened still further, the resultant external strain among the molecules will increase, they will attract each other still more strongly and tend to closer aggregation, and thus the solid form will appear. The negative or positive electrical condition of the gas, liquid or solid will be an index of the still unsatisfied charges residing in the substance in that state. The free and unhampered movement of atoms in an inert gaseous element and of molecules in other gases makes the question of the particular forms of such elements or gases immaterial; they have as gases no particular form. In the case of liquids, however, the resultant residual forces of the atoms and molecules will, as is the case in electrical bodies, act mostly at the surface, where the resulting force between the molecules of the surface layer, or the surface tension, as it is called, will give a particular form or shape to the liquid (as in a drop of water). The molecules inside a liquid appear to be stratified into layers loosely superimposed on each other. And in the case of solids the still larger residual force will result in arranging the molecules in a definite crystal structure on the pattern of a lattice, which is the special and specific form of solid chemical substances. Crystal structure is to solid compounds what the planetary structure is to the atom--not only a specific ordering of inner units, but the index and source of all external properties and activities. One of the most interesting recent discoveries is that in crystals there is a unit body or minute structure consisting of two or more molecules which is of a radicle character in that it always- acts as a unit in the upbuilding of the crystal.

Besides the gaseous, liquid, and solid phases of matter just discussed there is a fourth, to which in recent years an ever increasing amount of attention has been and is being devoted. This is the colloid state, in which one substance is dispersed throughout another in very minute particles which are yet larger than molecules. Originally substances were divided into colloids and non-colloids; but more recently it has been shown that non-colloids (like mineral salts) can under certain conditions be reduced to the colloid state. And now this division has been abandoned, and the colloid state is recognised as a fourth form of material aggregation applying to substances generally under certain conditions. Much of the earth and the air exists in the colloid state; but the colloid state is specially important because it seems to be distinctive of all life-forms--the protoplasm of all organic cells being organised in the colloid state. The protoplasm of the cells contains solid substances in most minute form dispersed throughout its jelly-like fluid, and this colloid state seems to link the inorganic with the organic substances in the cell.

Owing to their minute size, particles in the colloid state expose the maximum surface area in comparison with their mass; and the colloid state in consequence brings into action the play of surface energies more than any other phase of matter. In all forms of aggregation the surface molecules of matter are specially orientated; the active sides of the molecules being turned inwards, and the outer surface thus consisting of the weak ends of these molecules. This in orientation affects the surface tensions, chemical behaviour and energies of the surface molecules; and as colloids expose a maximum of such surfaces they show properties which are of a distinctive character. Thus at these surfaces loose unstable combinations with other special substances are easily formed, and colloids appear in consequence to have a peculiar and almost mysterious selective action for other substances. The phenomenon is called " adsorption "; the selected substances being adsorbed at the colloid surfaces. Colloids are thus used in many industrial processes to separate other substances from each other, to remove impurities, and in other ways to act as a selective separator of mixed substances. They also act as catalysts; that is to say, at their surfaces chemical actions take place and combinations are effected which otherwise would not be brought about. The colloid surface is apparently a special field of force or influence in which other chemical or physical reactions besides selective adsorption are facilitated. The enzymes, for instance, in the protoplasm of the cell are complex chemical substances in very minute colloid form, with the surface molecules or radicles specially orientated so as to facilitate in a most marvellous way the chemical and physical processes which are necessary for the organic activities of life. But enzymes are very particular or specific in their action, and each particular process has its own particular enzyme to bring it about. Thus enzymes transform the sugar or sugar-like contents of certain plants into alcohol; but each species of plant has its own enzyme, which will only operate on the material of that species. Similarly chlorophyll is probably a complex chemical compound probably in colloidal dispersion in the protoplasm of leaf cells and other green cells, and its colloidal surfaces are " fields " in which the energy of sunlight can synthesise the carbon dioxide of the air into organic compounds which ultimately take the form of sugar, starch and cellulose.

The marvellous behaviour of matter at its surfaces in the colloid state, and especially its mysterious " selective " power, has raised the hope that here the bridge may yet be found between the inorganic and the organic. Thus Dr. E. F. Armstrong says: "Enough has been said to show how the conception of an orientated active structure at the surface of a colloid aggregate might endow it with selective power of so fine a nature as almost to merit the description of intelligence; the further prosecution of research on these lines may well serve to bridge the gap between us and the full understanding of vital activity. 4

It has been usual to distinguish " physical " from " chemical " combination. The New Physics has, however, made it clear that there are two types of chemical change, involving two types of chemical combination and structure. The one type, which prevails among the salts, acids, and bases of inorganic chemistry, is a much looser, less rigid combination or union than the other, which prevails among the carbon compounds of organic chemistry. Thus common salt, which is a combination of sodium and chlorine, is now understood to be a more or less loose aggregation of free positive sodium atoms or ions held in equilibrium by an equal number of free negative chlorine atoms or ions; the equilibrium being fairly stable, without any actual union of the atoms such as was assumed by the older chemistry. Inorganic compounds, however, the linkage of the constituent atoms is real, and the compound is not a system of free ions in equilibrium, but a real combination or fixed structure of the atoms concerned. Organic compounds thus display an advance in respect of chemical structure in substances. While in inorganic salts and similar substances the looser arrangement of the atoms or ions approximates to the type of " physical " combination, in organic substances, on the other hand, the chemical union is more thorough and intense, and leads to a closer structural character, linked together by common electrons. In this connection it is important to remember that organic compounds are the mechanisms of life: we may therefore say that as we approach life we witness a more intense element of structure in chemical compounds. Life may have arisen in--at least it now uses as its mechanisms--chemical substances of a subtler structure than that which characterises inorganic compounds.

In connection with the explanation of the structure of the atom given above the question arises whether the structure of the atom is really as above indicated, or whether we have merely to do with a hypothesis to explain certain facts. The question is important, because it raises one instance of the general method of scientific explanation. Science deals with sensible phenomena and tries to co-ordinate them in accordance with known physical laws, and in doing so has often to interpret the sensible phenomena in a particular way in order to effect the necessary intelligible co-ordination. Thus, in the case of the atom, its existence as a fact is no longer disputed; but its structure on the model of a planetary system was no more than an inference from well-grounded sensible phenomena and has now been virtually abandoned in favour of a system of mathematical equations as a better symbolism. The so-called " structure " may be no more than a hypothetical symbolism. The sensible phenomena are quite different from the inferred structure, but they are quite definite, and have been most minutely measured or calculated. The electron and the nucleus have not been observed, but, certain light effects, which they accurately express, have been observed, and from these effects their mass and other properties have been calculated. The sensible phenomena actually observed include light effects, which are explained on the hypothesis of their transmission in particular wave-lengths; these explanations accord with the observed effects, and again form the basis of the supposed velocities, rotations and orbits of the electrons and nuclei, which are not directly observed but calculated with extraordinary minuteness and accuracy on the basis of the observed light effects. Similarly the light from the atom comes in definite observed quantities, which it has hitherto only been possible to interpret intelligibly as sudden changes in the orbits of the rotating electrons. The observed phenomena are light effects of various definite qualities and quantities; the. rest is theory or hypothesis, in which the elements of quality and quantity in the sensible phenomena are so minutely analysed and translated into elements of time and space as to result in the structure of the atom above given. And this hypothetical structure is then tested by all the phenomena which call for explanation, and it is only finally accepted when it affords a complete explanation of them all. The electrons, the nucleus, the revolutions of the electrons round the nucleus, the sudden leaps of the electrons from one orbit to the other: these are not observed realities or sensible phenomena, but they all rest on a basis of sensible light effects, which have been meticulously determined and tested by reference to other observed phenomena. They are therefore not sensible realities but accepted as scientific realities. They are not directly observed, but deduced from observations. They are the reflection, so to say, of the sensible phenomena in the human mind with its particular conceptual equipment. And if they are not the actual forms of nature, they are so close to them and measure and represent them so completely, that they are accepted as true and correct, that" is, in experimental accord with the deliverances of our senses until they are upset by new observations and replaced by new hypotheses. Thus the apparently unrelated and unintelligible data of sense in a particular case are 'by hypothesis construed into the structure of the atom; and the atoms with all their inner units and arrangements become the conceptual or scientific entities which correspond to, reproduce, and represent the data of sense. In other words, the conceptual or scientific order arises on the basis of the sensible observed order, and as long as the two are in working accord we accept them both together as the explanation of Nature. While thus according complete respect to both orders, we should always bear in mind that the sensible order is the governing factor to which the conceptual order has to conform. As long as it does so conform we accept it, not as sensible reality, but as an accurate measure and expression and completion of sensible reality. The hypothetical structure of the atom reproduces and expresses the observed facts; without such structure the in observed facts are unintelligible and inexplicable. We therefore accept the structure as a true and accurate explanation of the observed Jacts, even though it has not been directly observed as a structure. But the structure is really no more than a hypothesis, to be discarded as soon as it comes into conflict with new facts.

I conclude this chapter with a few general reflections on the nature of matter which will serve to emphasise and interpret the results of the foregoing discussion.

As indicated in the first chapter, the object of this work is to make a modest contribution towards the reform of the fundamental concepts of matter, life and mind, to assist in bridging the apparently impassable gaps between them and to interpret them in such a way as to present them as successive more or less continuous forms and phases of one great process, or as related progressive elements in one total coherent reality. In pursuance of that general object my aim in this chapter is to pave the way for a reform of the concept Of matter, to break down the old concept of matter as something inert, passive, barren, dead, as something with absolute contours and nothing beyond, as something final and presenting an impassable barrier to the kingdoms of life and mind beyond. This cannot be done by general philosophical reflections on the nature of matter as an object of thought, but only by a careful consideration of the concept of matter by the light of all the available physical knowledge. This must be my excuse for having referred to the Relativity Theory and the New Physics at some length. Certain general results emerge from our discussion which have an important bearing on the concept of matter.

In the first place, the old concept of matter as dead, passive, inert is clearly inconsistent with the recent developments of physical science. The old contradictory notion of dead matter as the vehicle and carrier of life must disappear in the light of our new knowledge. The difference between matter and life is no longer measured by the distance between deadness or absolute passivity on the one hand, and activity on the other--a distance so great as to constitute an impassable gulf in thought. The difference between them is merely a difference in the character of their activities. So far from matter being pure inertia or passivity, it is in reality a mass of seething, palpitating energies and activities. Its very dead-weight simply means the push of inner activities. Its inertia, which is apparently its most distinctive quality and has been consecrated by Newton in his First Law, has received its death-blow at the hands of Einstein. From the new point of view the inertia of matter is the same as its mass, and both are simply the result of the movement of Nature's internal energies; its apparent passivity is but the external aspect of its real activity. Matter itself is nothing but concentrated structural energy, energy stereotyped into structure. As space contracts with velocity, so mass or the inertia of matter increases through that contraction, and both the mass of matter and its quality of inertia or passiveness are therefore mere variable dependent aspects of Nature's high-speed energies. From this point of view matter is but a form of energy, concentrated by its exceeding velocity, and structured to appear massive or substantial. The very nature of the physical universe is activity or Action. The Law of the Quantum rules all.

The repercussion of all this on the old concept of matter is deadly. Once the new point of view is thoroughly realised and assimilated into popular thought, the bugbear of matter ceases to trouble our peace. We no longer continue to stare at a hopeless irreconcilable contradiction in experience. With the dissolution of the old traditional concept of matter the dead-weight of its utter passivity disappears from men's minds, and one of the greatest partition walls in knowledge falls down. The contacts with life may still be very difficult to establish. But at any rate the impassable gulf has disappeared. With the contours of the old fortress of matter razed, its field itself points the way for the transition to the kingdom of life beyond. For the fields of matter and life overlap, intermingle, and interpenetrate each other, the fruitful contacts are established, and the enriched and broadened concepts of matter and life appear as what they are--different phases in the evolution of an essential unity. The breakdown of the old concept of matter has prepared the way for a great advance towards a new synthetic world-conception.

In the second place, another advance of the New Physics has perhaps even greater significance in effecting a rapprochement between matter and life. I refer to the effect of Radioactivity in destroying the permanence of the natural elements, and in explaining the genesis of the elements from one another. Radioactivity has done a somewhat similar work for matter as Darwin's theory of Organic Descent did for life two generations ago. The fixity of the types of matter has followed the fixity of the types of life to the limbo of the obsolete. Of course there are marked differences in the operation of Radioactivity and Organic Descent. In one respect Radioactivity has not proved as powerful a factor as Organic Descent, for it holds out no promise of the creation of new species or elements beyond those already known. The Periodic Table does indeed indicate the vacant places for one or two more guests yet to arrive. But the number of elements is definitely and narrowly limited, and we have at present no definite reason to look forward to any large increase beyond those already known.5

1 Professor Millikan, however, speculates that "cosmic rays" are due to the disintegration in distant nebular universes of higher, more complex elements than are known to us, and that the debris of this disintegration is again redintegrated into known elements in interstellar space, matter thus being recreated. But this recreation of matter is thought to be inconsistent with the second law of Energy. The question, however, is whether the second law applies in the intra-atomic world and in inter-stellar space.

In another important respect Radioactivity differs from Organic Descent. Organic Descent professes to show how new and future species arise through variation and selection from those already existing. Radioactivity operates in the opposite direction and indicates how by elimination of certain unit constituents from a complex element there may be established a regress to another simpler known element. In the time-series Organic Descent professes to move forward, while the process of Radioactivity appears to be backward, or to retrace evolutionary steps taken in the past. In still another respect Radioactivity appears to be even more effective than Organic Descent, for it exhibits before our eyes the process of the transmutation of elements, while it is not yet definitely established that any natural species has yet been raised in the laboratory or will ever be raised in any period short of geological time. In a final respect there is a striking similarity between the two factors in that they both appear to proceed by definite substantial increments or decrements in effecting transmutations. Radioactivity expels definite numbers of Helium nuclei as steps in the transmutation of elements. According to De Vries and others the process of advance from old to new species or varieties is by way of definite discontinuous mutations, and not by the slow summation of minute variations. And Genetics to-day emphasises this similarity still more by identifying all organic variations with differences of genes in the nuclei of varying or mutating species.

The above differences in the operation of the two factors of Radioactivity and Organic Descent arise partly no doubt from inherent differences between matter and life, but also partly from other possible differences in their circumstances of a less fundamental character. Thus life is a mere child on this globe and is yet in the heyday of its growth and increase. As yet it recognises no limit or barrier in its first flush of youth. It spends with a lavish prodigality, which is in striking contrast to the frugality and conservatism of matter, for which the laws of Conservation and of Least Action have become the last word of wisdom and the unbroken rule of action. But then matter is old, old as the beginning, so old that its wrinkles are the fundamental curves oLthe SpaceTime universe. Life has only just begun, since the yesterday of Eozoic times, in the upbuilding of its new forms and types, and in this task it can proceed for millions of years to come. Matter, on the contrary, completed its active race probably more than a thousand million years before life began. It built up slowly and laboriously in nebular cold and solar heat, and amid conditions beyond the possibility of our knowledge or imagination, the elements from their simplest to their most complex forms, and from these again substances and compounds in rising complexity until at last protoplasm was reached. And in the favouring bosom of protoplasm life could be nurtured from its simple chemical beginnings and launched on its great career, most of which is still before it. Apparently the work of matter is done; in the great Space-Time curve it is now regressing from the more complex to the simpler types or elements, just as in organic Evolution we see a tendency for the most highly evolved and differentiated types to hark back for stability to simpler and stronger types. Radioactivity is doing to-day what Organic Descent (when it will indeed have become a descent) will do in the fullness of its time, when Life's spirit of adventure will have abated, and its aim will be safety first and conservation rather than progress.

When all allowance has been made for the differences in character and operation of Radioactivity and Organic Descent, there still remains a striking and unmistakable similarity between them. And between the Periodic Table of Chemistry on the one hand and Systematic Botany and Zoology on the other there remains something very much like a family resemblance. The concepts of families, genera and species could be applied to both; and in both cases there is a fluidity and plasticity of types which proves that, although they are in different kingdoms, yet they are in the same world of forms and geneses. One rises frdm a study of the Periodic Table and the New Physics with the feeling that matter can quite justifiably claim some distant relationship with life, and that life need not be quite ashamed of the rock whence she was hewn.

The intimate character of structure which the material universe and its field disclose justifies another general observation as bearing on the concept of matter. We have already seen that, properly understood, the ideas of activity, plasticity and evolution apply to matter in a sense not entirely dissimilar to that in which they apply to life, I am going to make a more daring suggestion and to indicate that in another even more important respect matter approximates to life. The structure of matter indicates that matter is also in a sense creative--creative, that is to say, not of its own stuff, but of the forms, arrangements and patterns which constitute all its value in the physical sphere. It is creative in a sense analogous to that in which we call life or mind creative of values. Remember that according to the new point of view we have not to judge of matter from the outside and as indifferent external spectators. We have to identify ourselves with the point of view of matter, so to speak. We have humbly to get into that closed cage; we have to take our post on that plane circular rotating disc.1

We have to interpret matter from the inside, from a point of view which is that of matter and not remote from and indifferent to it. And from that intimate angle matter is seen to create its structures and patterns and values very much as life or mind does on another much higher plane. Hitherto the idea of creativeness has been confined to the organic and mental aspects of the universe. Those who have called the universe creative have implicitly referred to the activity of life and mind in creating new arrangements, meanings and values. It has not been suggested that, from another point of view, the physical universe is also creative. The principles of the conservation of matter and energy have effectively barred any such idea. Novelty, originativeness and creativeness are quite inconsistent with the ordinary point of view and the popular ideas of matter as well as the more rigid mechanistic conceptions of science. Nobody, however, could have followed the above exposition of the structural character of matter without beginning to appreciate that in its evolution or creation of the forms, structures and types which characterise it from beginning to end, matter or the physical element in the universe is in a sense as truly creative as is organism or mind. The 1 in " values " of matter or the physical universe arise purely from these structures and forms. If the stuff of matter or energy or action were not definitely structural but diffuse throughout space, the entropy of the universe would be absolute, and its value for this cosmos from all points of view would be nil. The efficiency, utility and beauty, in short the values of matter, arise from the structures which are the outcome and the expression of its own inherent activities. In a very real sense the idea of value applies as truly and effectively in the domain of the physical as in that of the biological or the psychical. In both cases value is a quality of the forms and combinations which are brought about. Whether they are structures resulting from the activities of matter, or works of art or genius resulting from the activities of the mind, makes no real difference to the application of the ideas of creativeness and value in either case. We have to take " value " not merely in the human order, but in the order of the universe. A setting sun is part of nature, and its beauty is part and parcel with the order of the universe. Once we get rid of the notion of the world as consisting of dead matter, into which activity has teen introduced from some external or alien source; once we come to look upon matter not only ns active, but as self-active, as active with its own activities, our whole conception of the physical order is revolutionised, and the great barriers between the physical and the organic begin to shrink and to shrivel. Organism has by its inner activities and the influences of the environment evolved its own forms and types, and this great life-process is still going on before ' our eyes. As I have already suggested, a similar evolution of material structures and elemental types may have gone on during the practically infinite period of past time. And it may even be that, although new elements will no more be evolved, derived structures are still being created under suitable conditions. It is interesting to note, for instance, that under novel laboratory conditions new substances are continually being synthetically produced. The whole romance of the Aniline dyes is a tribute to the still active " creativeness " of matter under the proper external conditions.

There is another feature common to matter and life which points to genetic relationship between them. That feature is particulateness, discontinuity, discreteness among both material and living things. The search for continuity has been one of the most persistent quests of science--the reduction of differences, the resolution of complexes, and the smoothing out of the curves so that the way might be made smooth for that ideal of monism which haunts the visions of science. This search for continuity has had wonderful success; the vast multiplicity of different things in the material world has been reduced to a few ultimate entities and a few fundamental laws. And yet the deeper science has delved, the more fundamental has become this element of discreteness in the nature of things. The flow of nature is interrupted by halts and pauses in all directions. The atom was such a halt, and now that the atom has in a sense joined the flow of things, the quantum has appeared as an even more serious stop. Nature stores or expends her energy, not continuously, but in fixed quantities or quanta-- in spurts, and not in a continuous jet. If there were not these mysterious halts, she might run down in a flash, as Jeans has pointed out. Discreteness is thus discovered at the very sources of nature. It is this discreteness or individual element that specially distinguishes organic nature, even more than the inorganic. All forms of life are individual and different from each other; there is no identity anywhere. All attempts to smooth out the curves and unevenness of evolution and produce the semblance of a continuous advance have failed. Mutations, discontinuous jumps seem to be the law of the advance. And the discontinuity seems to be entrenched in the ultimate genes or factorial elements in the germ-cells. As we advance with our enquiry we shall have to stress more and more this element of discreteness, of individuation or individuality in Evolution. Here we find its real basis laid in the ultimate energy unit, in the quantum.

These considerations, in so far as they have any force, must influence our concept of matter and tend towards reducing the utter disparity which marks our traditional concepts of matter and life. Of course a great difference remains between these two concepts, between the chemical compound on the one side and the organic cell on the other. It would be futile to attempt to argue away this difference. It is and remains great, but its character has been fundamentally transformed. We may put the conclusion of our discussion in this way. In organic Evolution we come across mutations--not absolute breaks with the past, but sudden long steps of advance on the past, where one species or variety leaps forward from and in advance of another. In the advance from matter to life there is a leap forward, not as between species, but as between kingdoms. And we may conclude by saying that, instead of the old impassable gulf between matter and life, between the chemical compound and the cell, we have found on closer scrutiny only a mutation-- the greatest mutation of all undoubtedly in the whole range of science, but essentially nothing more than a mutation. They present the faint lineaments of a family resemblance, and as science advances and our philosophy looks more deeply, the resemblance will become clearer and more unmistakable.

Lastly, we have seen that matter in its colloidal state discloses properties and shows a behaviour which seem in some way to ariticipate the processes and activities of life in its most primitive forms. In any case it begins to lay the basis of those physical and chemical reactions which are specially required for vital activities. It shows a certain power of selectiveness, which may be related to chemical affinity, but which seems to have a farther reach and to partake of the character of life. It begins to-manufacture substances, such as the proteins, chlorophyll, and haemoglobin, which are the special mechanisms of life, and without which life as we know it could not be. These substances are the links which connect material structure with the life structures which are to follow in the course of Evolution. They are themselves non-living chemical substances, but they are the special instruments and the very basis of life, so to say. At their colloidal surfaces the energies of Nature are utilised to convert the inorganic material of Nature into the most complex organic substances required for the sustenance of life. We see matter in this colloidal state reaching up to the very threshold of life, so to speak. A gap remains; a great leap may have taken place across it. But beyond a doubt some forms of matter in their colloidal-state are fairly close to life in their properties. And beyond all doubt life began with much more primitive forms and structures than any of which we have knowledge to-day. Thus the gap may not have been so wide nor the leap so great as would appear to us to-day.

1 But its constitution remains a problem. The experiments of Prof. G. P. Thomson point to the conclusion that the electron is not simple, but consists of a central particle-like structure, surrounded by a field of waves which has put propel it forward in its rapid motion.

2 P. A. Dirac the view that the proton is the hole or empty space left by a departed electron, this hole behaving in many respects as a real entity.

3 The age of these oldest formations, the Algonkian mountains of Canada, has thus been, calculated as approximately 1400 million years. Thus on this basis we obtain the lowest limit for the age of the earth since the solid rocks were formed.

4 Chemistry in the Twentieth Century, p. 17

5 Professor Millikan, however, speculates that "cosmic rays" are due to the disintegration in distant nebular universes of higher, more complex elements than are known to us, and that the debris of this disintegration is again redintegrated into known elements in interstellar space, matter thus being recreated. But this recreation of matter is thought to be inconsistent with the second law of Energy. The question, however, is whether the second law applies in the intra-atomic world and in inter-stellar space.
