---
title: "The Reformed Concepts of Space and Time"
chapter: 2
---

Summary: It is not only in organic Evolution that the old fixed concepts and counters of thought are breaking down. Recent advances in physical science have extended the revolution to the domain of the inorganic; the fixity of the atom has followed that of species into the limbo of the obsolete. In many directions new concepts, more, in harmony with the fluid creative process of nature, are called for

We begin with the new concepts of Space and Time, which in the system of Relativity are taking the place of the old Newtonian concepts still commonly accepted. The new ideas of Space and Time arose from researches in the higher mathematics and physics, and were primarily concerned with the relative character of all actual motion in the universe, and the mathematical and physical consequences of this relativity. Thus the mathematical physicists assumed that to a moving observer a body moving with the velocity of the order of light appears to contract or to be shorter than it would be to a stationary observer, and the faster either of them moves the greater the contraction becomes. Time varies similarly, but in the opposite direction; while the space of the moving body appears to contract, its time appears to expand, so that it takes a longer time to pass a point than it would do if viewed by a stationary observer. This joint and inseparable variation of Space and Time was not only most important in itself, but led directly to the revolutionary conception that neither of them existed independently, but that together they form the Space-Time medium of the real physical world. From this point of view bodies and things as merely spatial are not real but abstractions, while events, which involve both Space and Time, are real and form the units of reality. The deposition of the old Space and Time and their replacement by Space-Time have been tested in the most searching way both in the immense world of astronomy and the most minute world of the atom, and in both cases the new concepts have been found to work satisfactorily.

THE variation of Space and Time has led to the further conclusion that in a world of relative motion such as ours, where observers and observed bodies are in motion with velocities like that of light, all c standards of measurement and all clocks of Time are themselves variable and give no constant results. But a varying standard must produce a warped or twisted field. Applying this conclusion to gravitation and the rotational movements of the universe, Einstein found that the Space-Time medium of the universe is curved and warped and not of the homogeneous character which was attributed to Space and Time according to the old ideas. In the neighbourhood of matter, that is, in all gravitational fields, events happen in curves and follow the curves of Space-Time. The result is that the entire universe acquires a definite structural character, and is not a diffuse homogeneity as was formerly supposed. According to the new SpaceTime concept, structure, definite organised structure, becomes the essential characteristic of the physical universe and its vast fields, and this structural character accounts for many hitherto inexplicable phenomena. Newton's and Kant's ideas of Space and Time compared with those of Einstein.

IN the preceding chapter I have tried to explain how the acceptance of the theory of Evolution must inevitably and profoundly affect our views as regards the nature of matter. In this chapter I proceed to inquire what bearing recent far-reaching physical researches and speculations have on this position. Our problem is to break away from the hard and narrow conceptions of the Victorian age, to see Nature once more in her fluid and creative plasticity, and to formulate our conceptions afresh from this deeper point of view. A great change has come over our views of Nature, a change great enough in the end to amount to one of the fundamental* revolutions in human thought. But we are still in the process of that change, and it is therefore difficult for us to - realise its full significance. Three dates stand out in bold relief as inaugurating that change: 1859, when Darwin's Origin of Species was published; 1896, when Becquerel discovered Radioactivity; and 1915, when Einstein published his General Theory of Relativity. Round these three great events other discoveries of profound interest have taken and are still taking place; and in the result our entire viewpoints and standpoints as regards Nature and reality are undergoing a fundamental change which must in the end affect every province of human thought and conduct. The fixity of organic species is gone; the fixity of inorganic elements is gone; the evenness of space and time is gone. The position is once more becoming fluid, the old rigid order is visibly dissolving, the fixed landmarks and beacon-points by which former generations steered their course in science are becoming submerged. And the task awaits the future out of this fluid situation and these instabilities once more to build a stable world of ideas, which will be in closer harmony with the reality around us and within us. One of the aspects of Evolution has already briefly engaged our attention in the last chapter, and other aspects of it will be considered in Chapter VIII. In the present chapter reference must be made to Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, and the bearing it has on our ideas of space and time as the framework in which events are located, and the medium in which Evolution takes place. The resulting view of the universe as structural, and of the element of structure or configuration as fundamental to the universe and all its forms, is important for the subject and the argument of this work.

People become frightened when they are invited to consider Einstein's theory. Its refined abstractions, its abstruse mathematical form, its complete novelty and reversal of ordinary common-sense view-points make it a terror to the uninitiated. And yet I believe the Einstein view-point can be quite simply and intelligibly put. Indeed it must be so put if it is ever to become part and parcel of ordinary educated thought. We must distinguish between the simple and clear view-point itself, and the recondite mathematical processes by which it was reached, and the technical mathematical form in which it is expressed, and from which for all ordinary purposes it can be separated. The understanding and appreciation of the Relativity view-point are not dependent on a knowledge of the process by which Einstein reached that view-point. The result is quite distinct from the process. It is like groping our way through a long, dark, rough tunnel, and at the end emerging into the clear daylight beyond: it is not necessary for the appreciation of the new view that one should plunge back into the dark tunnel. Besides, I must frankly state my own lay impression that the. Einstein theory, as distinguished from the broad view-point attained, has not yet found its final expression. All great truths are in their essence simple; and the absence of simplicity of statement only shows that the ultimate form has not yet been reached. The day may yet come when the ten recondite Einstein equations of gravitation may appear as but the scaffolding of the simpler structure yet to arise, the naturalness and inevitableness of which will be as evident to every educated person as the heliocentric conception of Copernicus has become.

The Einstein theory arose originally from researches in the higher mathematics and physics, and a brief reference to this mathematical origin will be useful. Galileo and Newton were the fathers of the modem classical mechanics; they (and especially Newton) formulated the laws of moving bodies in an exact mathematical science. Now the germ of the new Relativity mechanics is the almost obvious fact that the motion of a body is never absolute, but is always relative to some other body or point. If this body or point of reference is stationary, Newton's laws of motion apply completely, and the geometry of Euclid also applies, so that the movements of bodies can be represented by geometrical figures. Such bodies are said to move in Euclidean space, which is the same and homogeneous all through and in all directions. Now since Newton's time a great deal of attention has been given to the case where the body of reference or the observer is not stationary but is also in motion. This case -is important, because it is actually that of all bodies in our universe, in which all observers or points of reference are themselves in motion. A point on the earth, for instance, rotates with a certain velocity round the centre of the earth, while the earth again rotates with another velocity round the sun. The sun itself is not stationary but moving with reference to some star in the constellation Hercules, which is Itself in motion with reference to the star stream of the Milky Way. It is this case of the moving observer or point of reference with which Einstein's theory deals, and it is therefore clear that this theory faces the problem of motion as it actually exists in the universe. The impression of rest or stationariness to us as observers in the universe is a mere illusion, and the great service of Einstein was to explore this illusion and to show in exact mathematical form to what extent it affects our vision and judgment of movement in the world. Let us therefore take the case of moving observers. The original researches dealt with problems of electricity and light, and it is with objects or observers moving with a velocity of the order of light that the real difficulty arises. But for the sake of simplicity I shall substitute for a ray of light an ordinary moving object. Now when a moving object (say a train in motion) is viewed by an observer in motion (say an observer in a motor-car moving on a road parallel to the train), Fitzgerald and Lorentz found it necessary to make the following assumptions to explain the facts:

(A) The train appears a little shorter than it would to a stationary -observer.

(B) The time taken by the train to pass a point appears a little longer (or the train appears to move somewhat more slowly) than it would to a stationary observer.

In other words, to a moving observer the length or the space occupied by a moving body is smaller in the direction of its motion than it would appear to a stationary observer; and similarly the time taken by the observed body to pass a point will be longer. And the faster the observer or observed body moves, the more the space and time of the observed body will vary for him, compared to what they would do if he were at rest. These two variations of space and time are joint variations, happening simultaneously but in an opposite direction, the one becoming less in proportion as the other becomes more to the moving observer. Space contracts and time expands in inverse proportions according to the rate of motion of a moving body of reference or a moving observer, either of which moves with a velocity approaching that of light. One may generalise this result and say that so long as several observers move at different rates but uniformly and in straight lines with regard to each other, the velocity or speed of the moving body which they are observing follows the same law for all of them, as the proportional co-variations of their respective spaces and times cancel each other out, so to say. This is a popular way of stating the main principle of Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity, first published in 1905, in rigorous mathematical form. It explained the fact, which had been repeatedly confirmed by the most accurate experiments of Michelson and Morley, that the velocity of light is always the same, whatever the velocity of its source, and however great may be the difference in velocities of the moving observers who are trying to measure it. An observer moving away from a flash of light at a rate which is half that of light will see the flash at the same time as a stationary observer, and not later as one might suppose. The reason is that, the time and space measures of the moving observer have changed jointly so as to neutralise the results which his motion might have on his observation. For all bodies or observers moving at ordinary terrestrial rates the change is so small as to be negligible, and it is only when one or both of them move at a rate approaching that of light that the apparent contraction and expansion become important and have to be considered in actual calculations.

The two salient facts to bear in mind as a result of the above is: that to moving observers flocks and standards of measurement in very fast motion are no longer absolute but vary according to the rates of motion of these observers or of the clocks or standards, and that there is this curious joint and opposite variation of the space and time measures of moving observers or bodies. In fact separately Space and Time must be mere abstractions, as in all actual movements they are always found in inseparable conjoint action.

From this co-variation of Space and Time it is but a step to Minkowski's great idea, first formulated in 1908, that in natural events Space and Time are not independent factors, and that in the mathematical representation of events the correct way is to introduce time as a fourth dimension, not of space, but of the Space-Time continuum in which events really take place. Time is, of course, in many ways unlike space and is not another dimension of it, but this inseparable co-variation in all events which happen in nature makes it both feasible and proper that we should substitute the real Space-Time continuum of events for the old abstract three dimensional space of bodies or points in space. In passing it may here be pointed out that the old notion of the separate reality of space and of time involved both the errors of analysis and of abstraction to which attention was drawn in the last chapter, and Minkowski's brilliant idea has simply brought u$ back to the natural fact as it occurs in experience, where nothing ever happens in space alone or in time alone, but always in both together, and where objects are not observed by themselves, but always as elements or items in the stream of perceived events. Nay more, it can be easily shown that the very ideas of Space and Time interpenetrate each other and are dependent on each-other. Succession or the time-series, and co-existence or the space-series, are necessary to reach other and would not be even intelligible apart from each other. For the succession (time) would perish at each step and would not even form a series, unless it had enduringness or co-existence (space). And similarly the co-existence (space) would stop at its first step and would not be spread out or extended unless it had also succession (time).

To Einstein this concept of a Space-Time continuum proved most welcome and fruitful, and he proceeded to apply it to the explanation of all movements in the universe, not only to uniform and rectilinear motions which take place in uniform Euclidean space, but also to rotating and accelerated motions which take place in a gravitational field of a non-Euclidean character.

His first step was to illustrate, by purely theoretical considerations, the fact that a body under the influence of a constant force, and therefore moving with a constantly increasing acceleration, would to an observer situated on it behave in exactly the same way as a body acted on by gravitation. Thus suppose a man enclosed in a cage so that he cannot observe any other body and cannot notice his own motion. And suppose this cage suspended in distant space where there is no gravitation. And suppose further that this cage is drawn upward with a constant force, so that it moves faster and faster with a constantly increasing acceleration. In truth the case is therefore one of acceleration. But by the enclosed observer this motion and acceleration of the cage and himself will not be noticed. He would only feel like being pulled down by his own weight. If he loses any object from his hand, it will fall to the bottom of the cage like a stone dropped on the earth. What is more, the rate at which the object drops is the same, whatever its figure or size or amount of material. The fact italicised is distinctive of gravitation. In other words, the man in the cage will think that he and the cage and the object therein are all acted upon by gravitation. What is really due to acceleration appears to be a case purely and simply of gravitation. Thus we see acceleration and gravitation are really the same phenomena and only different in appearance to observers. Acceleration and gravitation are, in fact, equivalent expressions. Einstein's closed cage may yet become as historic as Newton's falling apple.

Now take rotation, which is simply a special case of acceleration. And let us imagine an observer situated on a rotating or revolving plane circular disc and proceeding to measure the area of the disc and the rate at which it is revolving. He has two identical clocks, one of which he puts near the centre of the disc and the other near the circumference in order to take some time measurements. When he proceeds to take the time of the clock near the centre he finds that it moves faster than the clock placed near the circumference. We have already seen why this is so. The motion of the disc at the centre is nil, and its motion at the circumference quite marked, and the times of identical clocks near these two points will therefore vary to the observer. And similarly the rate of any identical clock will vary according to the distance of its position on the surface of the disc from the centre, as the motions of all points on the disc will differ according to their distance from the centre, where the motion is slower. He then proceeds to apply identical measuring rods and finds the same continual variation. He finds that the identical measuring rods vary in length according to their position on the disc; one placed on the circumference is shorter than one placed near the centre. And the differing lengths of the rods will measure up different spaces. The observer will become utterly confused, and will finally conclude that the spaces on the disc are not the same everywhere and in all directions, but appear to vary in all directions and to be twisted, warped and curved. Or, as we would say, the space of the disc is not straight-line homogeneous uniform Euclidean space, but curved and non-Euclidean. Taking the variations of the spaces and times on the rotating disc together, we conclude that the disc is not a Euclidean space but a non-Euclidean Space-Time continuum.

As we have seen that the phenomena of acceleration (including rotation) and gravitation are equivalent, these considerations in reference to the rotating disc apply also to every gravitational body. We know that gravitation acts at a distance from the centre of the gravitational body; in fact every such body is surrounded by a gravitational field far larger than itself. Therefore the non-Euclidean characters will also distinguish the Space-Time continuum in this field. In other words, movements and happenings in this field will not follow the law of a uniform time and a homogeneous identical space in all directions. They will take place in curves, exactly as on our rotating disc. A body falling in space through such a field will on entering it and while in it follow, not a straight path, but the curve which coincides most closely with its original straight path; a ray of light passing through the field will similarly follow the nearest curve instead of a straight line. And indeed any physical event within that field will, in so far as it is of a translational character, follow the curve on which it happens to take place. These deductions from theory have been experimentally verified in most important particulars.

According to this theory the mysterious " attractive " power of matter, which is called gravitation, assumes quite a different character. The apparent attraction is simply the curved or bent paths due to the movements in the universe of masses charged with energy, which (except as pushes and pulls on our bodies) we ourselves do not particularly notice as we happen to partake of the same movements as the observed phenomena. This, however, does not make of gravitation an unreality, due to the subjective vagaries of the observer. Gravitation, as we have seen, now becomes the curves of the real Space-Time world in the neighbourhood of matter; it marks the inevitable paths which all events must follow in the physical universe. So, far from being subjective or merely relative to the observer, gravitation becomes the very structure of the real world and connotes the stratification which characterises the vast fields of the Space-Time continuum. Our whole conception of the universe is altered. Instead of conceiving the universe as consisting of material bodies floating in a medium of uniform homogeneous space, we now look upon the masses of " matter " (themselves due to high-speed energies) as developing huge " fields," in which the curves of the lines can be calculated and the course of events happening in them can be predicted. For events follow the curves and their future course can be calculated, once their position on the curves is determined. The physics of Nature thus becomes in part an annex of the geometry of Space-Time, and a new power is placed in the hands of man, limited only by the limitations of his mathematical insight and genius. The concept of the "field" becomes all-important in science and in thoughts The "field" of matter is simply the curved structure of the real Space-Time, which extends far beyond sensible matter itself. Throughout its vast "fields" the universe assumes a form not very much unlike the curved contours and unevennesses which we associate with the physical appearance of this globe. The contours of the unseen universe of the Space-Time field which surrounds us follow Very much the lines which meet our eye on sea and land. But these lines are not mere empty form. They are not mere curves of beauty; they are real and causal, for they determine the course of events in the universe. The peripheries of rotating bodies are such curves, the planets move round the suns in such curves; light is propagated along such curves; in fact these curves are the pathways of the physical universe which all physical events must follow. The inmost nature of the universe is active Energy or Action and involves the interplay of tremendous activities, whose result is expressed in matter and in these curves of its field; and these curves are nothing but the actual orientation or direction of events in the Space-Time field of the material universe. Where bodies seem to be moving under the influence or compulsion of forces, they are really only following the curves of the gravitational field, and the forces are purely imaginary. There are no forces in the real world but events move freely along lines of curvature which are the lines of least resistance.

What is or would be the situation beyond the material universe and its vast fields? There we pass beyond the bounds of gravitation, where there is neither rotation nor acceleration, where " bodies " (if such astral abstractions could be imagined) persist in their state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line according to Newton's First Law. There Space-Time, if it could be imagined to exist, would not be warped or curved, but would be homogeneous and continuous, and would be exactly the form of empty nothingness. In fact, homogeneous Euclidean Space-Time beyond all real fields is simply a limiting conception of thought and would correspond to nothing that we have any knowledge of in our universe, in which the great masses of matter everywhere produce curved fields.

It may be interesting, in conclusion, to point out the difference between this conception of Space-Time in the Relativity Theory and the conceptions of Space and Time formulated by Newton and Kant. For Newton both Space and Time were absolutes; that is to say, were real invariable permanent entities or characters of things and events. They were each homogeneous and continuous and therefore adequately expressible by the geometry of Euclid. There was nothing subjective about them. For Kant, who in other respects profoundly admired the Newtonian system, the great problem of knowledge was how to determine the relative contributions made to our knowledge of the world by the subjective and objective factors respectively, and especially how much and what the mind brought into the common pool of knowledge and experience. His answer in effect was that the action of the mind was creative in experience and that it contributed to our knowledge--(a) the elements of Space and Time which are nothing but the mind's own sensuous forms of intuition or perception imposed on the materials of sense and experience, and (b) the general conceptual system of knowledge which follows from the categories of the Understanding, and (c) certain ultimate regulative principles of the human Reason. According to this view, therefore, Space and Time are nothing but the necessary forms of man's sensuous perception; they do not exist in external reality, but are imposed by the mind on all objects of sense. While accepting the homogeneous universal Euclidean characters which Newton ascribed to Space and Time, Kant denied that they were real entities or characters of things or events. If these characters belonged to things, Kant failed to understand how the a priori synthetic character of mathematical knowledge was possible, and he could only explain this fact by making the sensuous form of things a subjective contribution of the mind itself. According to him the universal forms of Space and Time in -experience were due, not to the things or the world to which they seemed to belong, but purely and simply to the perceiving mind which invested all things or events with them.

In contradistinction to both these theories, Space and Time in the theory of Relativity as conjoint co-ordinate forms belong both to the mind and to things; and the whole effort of Einstein was to separate the subjective appearance from the objective reality, to separate the relative, variable and disturbing contribution made by the observing mind from the real permanent Space-Time factor which is inherent in the physical universe. If the confirmation of theory by facts means anything it must be admitted that Einstein has been singularly successful in his analysis and evaluation of these two subjective and objective aspects of the Space-Time concept. That Space and Time were not, on the one hand, merely subjective conditions of experience as Kant held, nor, on the other, merely objectively given elements for experience as Newton held, but that they were both subjective and objective contributions to experience, might have been the discovery of a sound psychology or epistemology. But that these two factors of Space and Time have been fused into one synthesis, from which both the subjective and objective elements have been properly sorted out and isolated and valued and rigorously determined, is an achievement of the most outstanding importance not only for science but also for philosophy. It is unnecessary to point out that in the theory of Relativity Space and Time are not metaphysical conceptions or forms. The infinite homogeneous Space and Time which to Kant were mental forms imposed on all sensuous experience, and to Leibniz the pre-established permanent universal order of co-existence and succession among things, are to Einstein mere limiting pseudo-concepts, metaphysical abstractions without relation to our real experience. In our experience Space and Time are given elements just as colour, weight and the rest. The task of science is to co-ordinate these elements in an intelligible form, and in doing so Einstein has simply explored them as if they were real physical experience like the rest. The result is the elimination of certain historic errors from the concepts of Space and Time, and the determination of their physical qualities in line with the rest of our physical experience and concepts. The Space-Time continuum, instead of being a vague, homogeneous, formless, metaphysical concept, becomes a part of physical reality, becomes the "field" of the material world, with a definite structure of its own. Structure, real differentiated structure, becomes the inmost form not only of matter but also of its real Space-Time field. The close bearing of this on the main argument of this work will appear from the following chapters.
