---
title: "Mind as an Organ of Wholes"
chapter: 9
---

Summary: Mind is, after the atom and the cell, the third great fundamental structure of Holism. It is not itself a real whole, but a holistic structure, a holistic organ, especially of Personality which is a real whole.

Psychology treats mind in man and the higher animals as a factor or phenomenon by itself, and analyses it into various modes of activity, such as consciousness, attention, conception, feeling, emotion, will, etc. In this work Mind is viewed from a different angle; it is a form of Holism and it is studied as a holistic structure, with a definite relation to other earlier holistic structures. It has, therefore, a much wider setting and performs more fundamental functions in the order of the universe than appears from Psychology.

Mind springs from two roots. In the first place, it is a continuation, on a much higher plane, of the system of organic regulation and co-ordination which characterises Holism in organisms.

Mind is thus the direct descendant of organic regulation and carries forward the same task. This is the universalising side of Mind, and appears in the conceptual-rational or reasoning activity, which co-ordinates and regulates all experience. Its physical basis is the brain and neural system, which is the central system of regulation and co-ordination in the body. It is thus the crowning phase of the regulative, co-ordinative process of Holism.

In the second place, Mind is a development of an “ individual ” aspect of Holism which already plays a subordinate part in organisms. In man it pushes to the front as conscious individuality or the Self of the Personality, and becomes as conspicuous a feature of developed Holism as regulative co-ordination, if not more so. This intense element of individuality is the principal novelty in the development of Mind, the real revolutionary departure from the prior system of regulative routine, and in Personality it culminates in a new order of wholes. Mind in its individual aspect is thus the chief means whereby organic Holism has developed into human Personality.

Mind is in some respects as old as life, but life outran it in the race of Evolution. Besides, Mind needed life as a nurse, and its full development has therefore had to wait for that of life. The extraordinary self-regulation of organisms must, therefore, not be put to the credit of Mind, which was essentially a later development of Holism.

Mind is traceable ultimately to inorganic affinities and organic selectivities. The “ tension ” of a body in disequilibrium gradually became covered with a vague “ feeling ” of discomfort, which had survival value’; instead of remaining a passive state it became active as ad-tension or attention, and ultimately consciousness. Interest became appreciable. Simultaneously the individual side of Mind developed as conation, seeking, experiment; and from this double basis Mind grew with phenomenal rapidity in the earlier species of the genus Homo.

The individual self-conscious conative Mind is rightly stressed by psychology as the Subject of experience or the Self. In the universal system of order this individual appears as a disturbing influence, as a rebel against that order. But the rebel fights his way to victory, achieves plasticity and freedom, and is released from the previous regular routine of Holism. Mind thus through its power of experience and knowledge comes to master its own conditions of life, to secure freedom and to control the regulative system into which it has been born. Freedom, plasticity, creativeness become the keynotes of the new order of Mind.

This is, however, only one side of mental evolution. Pari passu with this individual development the universalizing conceptual rational side of Mind also develops rapidly; its regulative Reason makes Mind a part of the universal order, and the individual and universal aspects of Mind mutually enrich and fructify each other, and on the level of human Personality result in the creation of a new ideal world of spiritual freedom. This union of the “ individual ” subjective Mind with the universal or rational Mind is possible because the individual Mind has itself arisen in the holistic regulative bosom. Pure individualism is a misleading abstraction; the individual becomes conscious of himself only in society and from knowing others like himself; his very capacity for conceptual experience results mostly from the use of the social instrument of language. The individual springs from universal Holism, and all his experience and knowledge ultimately tend towards the character of regulative order and universality. Thus knowledge assumes in the first instance the form of an empirical order, as a system of common sense. Gradually the discrepancies of this system are eliminated and knowledge approximates to science, to a scientific conceptual order, in which concepts and principles beyond empirical experience are assumed to underlie the world of experience. The scientific world-conception marks the triumph of the universal element in Mind, but only on the basis of the freedom and control which the individual mind has mainly achieved. Mind as an organ of the whole, while taking its place in the universal order, has emancipated itself from the earlier routine of regulation and has assumed creative control of its own conditions of life and development. Thus it creates its own environment in society, language, tradition, writing, literature, etc., instead of being dependent on an alien environment as on the organic level. Again, Mind frees itself from the intolerable burden of organic inheritance by inheriting merely the widest, most plastic capacity to learn, and letting the social environment and tradition carry on the onerous duty of recording the past. While the animal is hidebound with its own hereditary characters, the human Personality is free to acquire a vast experience in his individual life.

Mind has its conscious illuminated area and its subconscious “ field.’ In this field the forgotten experience of the individual life as well as the physiological and racial inheritance exercises a powerful influence. It is this influence that proves decisive for our fundamental bias, our temperament, our point of view, and our individual outlook on persons and things. It is of an intensely holistic unanalysable character; it is even possible that our neural endowment carries with it more in the way of sensation’ and intuition than appears from the special senses; that the sensitive basis from which they have been differentiated has continued to develop pari passu with them and to-day forms, a subtle holistic sense, a capacity of psychical sensing or intellectual intuition which explains our holistic sense of reality as well as other obscure phenomena, such as telepathy. So much for the influence of the past. The future also becomes a potent influence on Mind. Through its dual activity of conception and conation Mind forms ” purposes “ which envisage future situations in experience and make the future an operative factor in the present. Purpose marks the liberation of Mind from the domination of circumstances and indicates its free creative activity, away from the trammels of the present and the past. Through purpose Mind finally escapes from the house of bondage into the free realm of its own sovereignty. All through its great adventure its procedure is fundamentally holistic, and this can be shown by reference to the various activities of Mind as analysed by psychology. Pree creative synthesis appears everywhere in mental functioning, and not least in the region of Metaphysics, Ethics, Art and Religion, which, however, fall outside the scope of this work.

IN previous chapters Mind has often been mentioned as a factor in Evolution. In all these references only the well-known meanings and activities of Mind have been assumed, and my procedure in making use of the factor of Mind in anticipation of its full discussion is therefore not so objectionable as it might appear from a purely theoretical point of view. The successive phases of the whole so telescope into each other that it is impossible to treat each phase in a water-tight compartment, and any attempt to do so would only result in a distorted view of the subject as a whole. In dealing with matter we had to anticipate the coming development of life; in dealing with life we had to anticipate the beginnings of the future development of Mind. So far from there being a disadvantage in this overflow of these concepts into each other’s domain, a truer picture of reality results from such a treatment, which softens the contours of the somewhat too hard and artificial distinctions popularly drawn between them, and helps to disclose the underlying unity which pervades them all. It is, however, advisable now to look at the factor of Mind more closely, to define its characters, and to study its functions as an organ and expression of Holism.

It will be readily recognised that the problem of Mind is not for us the same as it is for the psychologist. Psychology treats of the mind in man and the higher animals as a distinct phenomenon by itself, which it analyses and explores in its various elements, and which it studies as a separate department or rather compartment in the total domain of science. For the psychologist the question of boundaries Sis, therefore, essential; he must demarcate his area of Mind from other areas in the total world of knowledge. He must at all costs vindicate the claims of psychology as a separate science, distinct from the rest. And having with more or less success differentiated the scope of his science from those of other sciences, he then proceeds to explore the details of his science in the manner which is well known to us from the methods and procedure of the great masters of psychology. It is just here in the settlement of boundaries, in the demarcation of the domain of psychology from other domains in science, that the fundamental difficulty for psychology arises. For Mind is much more elusive and penetrative than life and still more so than matter. Its “ field ” covers and penetrates the “ fields ” of matter and life in a way which makes the tracing of hard-and-fast boundaries very difficult, if not practically impossible. It seems to impinge in all directions on areas already apparently securely held by the other departments of natural and biological science; its claims are contested in many directions; and serious doubts arise in how far it really has a territory of its own distinct from other territories in science. The nature of Mind makes this difficulty inherent and irremediable, and psychology as a separate science will always have to remain content with an intensive cultivation of its central area only, and a sharing of the outer marches and outlying territories with the natural and biological sciences. To me it seems that such a condominium of the debatable area, however awkward for psychology, is by no means an unmixed evil for science in general, and that the intimate contact of the different view-points and methods of psychology and the other sciences over this area may prove fruitful and productive of great advances in future.-- This is, however, remarked by the way. My real point is the difference in the treatment of mind from the standpoints of psychology and of the concept of Holism respectively. For psychology Mind is a distinct phenomenon to be studied by itself. For the theory of Holism Mind is but a phase, though a culminating phase, of its universal process. The question of boundaries, so fundamental for the psychologist, does not exist for us. From our point of view that is a mere parochial question; for us Mind is not merely a phenomenon of human and animal psychology. We have to trace the connections of Mind with the earlier phases of matter and life; we have, so to say, to lay bare the foundations of Mind in the order of the universe. Mind as an expression of Holism, Mind as an organ of Holism: that is our problem.

We have already seen that the atom and the cell were the two great departures in the upbuilding of the universe, the two great abiding peaks of achievement in the rise of creative Holism, which have in turn become the basis and fundamental units of all existence. We now come to the third, which in the order of the universe is perhaps as great a departure, and from our human point of view even more significant than the other two. In Mind we reach the most significant factor in the universe, the supreme organ which controls all the other structures and mechanisms. Mind is not yet the master, but it is the key in the hands of the master, Personality. It unlocks the door and releases the new-born spirit from the bonds and shackles and dungeons of natural necessity. It is the supreme system of control, and it holds the secret of freedom. Through the opened door, and the mists which still dim the eyes of the emergent spirit, it points to the great vistas of future attainment. Mind is the eye with which the universe beholds itself and knows itself divine. In Mind Nature at last emerges from the deep sleep of its far-off beginnings, becomes awake, aware and conscious, begins to know herself, and consciously, instead of blindly and unconsciously, to reach out towards freedom, towards progress, and towards the goal of the ultimate Good. Mind is thus the organ of control, of knowledge and of values. No wonder that to the young Socrates it came as a great spiritual revelation when first he learned from Anaxagoras that not matter but mind was the ultimate principle of the world. It is at any rate worthy to be set by the side of the atom and the cell as among the fundamental advances in creative Holism.

It would be an interesting speculation at this stage to pause and ask, from our knowledge of the previous lines of advance in the atom and the cell, what the next step was to be, or rather in what direction it might be looked for. In what way precisely does Mind fit into the scheme of the earlier structures and mark another step forward in the great line of holistic advance? An answer to this larger, more speculative question may give us some general clue to the nature of Mind as the next great factor or phase in evolution, and may form a fitting introduction to the narrower, more practical question of the functions and activities of Mind in the higher animals and man.

Mind is an advance on what has gone before in two directions. And it is the peculiar interaction between ’these double lines of advance, the intersection of the two curves of advance, so to say, that produces the uniqueness of Mind as a natural phenomenon. In order to appreciate this we have to grasp the point which has been reached in the preceding sketch of the evolution of Holism.

We have seen that both matter and life are structures or patterns, and that the advance of Evolution consists in the emergence of ever more complex and intensive structures, ever more complexly and highly organised wholes. In the structures of matter the number of co-operative elements are fewer and their interactions are simpler, so that it is still possible to some extent to trace elementary effects to their separate causes and sources in the structure itself. Structure is dominant and Its functions are calculable as elements of structure. As, however, we proceed from physical to chemical structures the fusion and unification of elements and functions become more marked, and the structures become at the same time more complex. When we come to the structures of life we find not only the structural elements far more numerous and the structures far more complex, but also the organisation much more intensive and unified and the functions much more single and unified, individual and unanalysable. In a tree or an animal, for instance, we find an infinity of cells and cell-structures of all degrees of specialisation mutually adapted to and cooperating with each other for the maintenance of a single individual whole in a most wonderful way. We do not ascribe this co-operation and unity of action to some presiding intelligence in the tree or animal. In organism as such there is no psychic control; and yet there is a control so simple, so automatic, so effective as to baffle our powers of understanding. The inner co-ordination and self-regulation in organisms which is the organic phase of Holism is indeed something marvellous, almost something miraculous. And in its way and on its own plane nothing more wonderful or perfect has been reached in the evolution of the universe. Conscious Mind with its uncertainties, its aberrations, its failures, seems a mere bungling experiment compared with this unfailing certainty and regularity. The irregularities and eccentricities of Mind in man compare very unfavourably with the unerring precision and regularity of organic activity and functioning in all highly developed plants and animals. Think of the well-ordered society which constitutes a big animal or tree! Compare the love-making and union and reproduction in plants and organisms with the love-making and union of hearts of humans! Compare the social organisation of insects with our social disorganisation and anarchy, our painful and uncertain social experiments and expedients even in the most highly developed human societies! No, organism has nothing to learn from highly developed Mind in the way of regulation, co-ordination or inner control of structures and functions. The self-balance of processes and activities in organisms and insect societies surpasses anything our ingenuity can understand or encompass. It is by reflections such as these that the impression is borne in upon us that conscious Mind is no mere continuation and development of the organic process, but largely a fresh experiment in the universe, an experiment still in the making, and by no means in every respect a successful one. Mind, in fact, is a new structure still in process of making, and not a direct continuation or expansion of what has gone before. It is a superstructure on the basis of the pre-existing physical and physiological structures, and it carries on the task of Evolution on somewhat new lines of its own, and initiated by itself. It has not appeared suddenly and from the blue at any particular point, though its advance may have partaken of the character of a mutation, or a series of mutations. Its primordial roots probably lay in the- beginnings of life itself, and in the favouring bosom of life its embryonic structure developed until in time it could appear as an independent factor, with a steadily growing power over life itself. But during all that immense formative period it was but a nursling of life and in no intelligible sense was it responsible for the delicate, complicated, internal self-ordering of the life structures which must be attributed to another prior factor, or rather to a prior development of the same underlying holistic process of which Mind is a later development. Conscious mind is a new and recent departure in evolution.

Let me now turn to the consideration of the double lines of advance along which Mind emerges and pushes forward in its evolution. In the discussion of cell-structures in Chapter IV we noted a double process in Holism; one of which is the regulative universalising process of structural order to which so much attention has been paid in this study, and the second of which I called individuation. Let me here say a few words about the latter aspect of the holistic advance, which remained of a somewhat subordinate character and comparatively minor importance until the appearance of Mind. Holism, as its very idea implies, is a tendency towards unity, a blending and ordering of multiple elements into new unities. From the more or less homogeneous to the heterogeneous; from heterogeneous multiplicity again to greater, more advanced harmony, to an harmonious co-operative ordered structural unity; such a formula may serve as a rough-and-ready description of the holistic process. Thus, for instance, in the process of Evolution we see the advance from material systems to individual organisms. One organism is not merely a duplicate of another, as one molecule of water is a duplicate of another. It is single and individual, with a character of its own. And the element of separate individuality increases as the differentiation and variation increase with the advance of Evolution. Such individual differences tend to increase, and at the same time their blending in the individual tends to become ever more unique. This tendency towards individuation is inherent in the holistic process and receives an immense impetus when the human level of development is reached. Here for the first time individuality acquires its true and full meaning. Everyone knows hat is meant by individuality as applied to humans. Not only are no two human beings alike; their separate characteristic individualities are what is most distinctive of them and what they are known by and what principally determines their relations in life. There is in each human being not only a peculiar blending of characters but also a sense of the uniqueness of this blending, a sense of separate and specific selfhood which constitutes his or her very essence. Humans are not mere units (as material bodies), they are also individuals; they are not merely individuals (like organisms), but also unique selves. Thus is the fundamental principle of individuation finally consummated in the human. The human being is a conscious self, and this selfhood becomes in turn the basis of his Personality, which is the supreme structure yet reached in Evolution and with which we shall deal in the next chapter. It is a striking fact that in the holistic advance as I have sketched it in previous chapters the dominant note and feature of progress is order, with an. ever-increasing measure of regulation and co-ordination and control so as to make that order effective; while the feature of individuation is comparatively insignificant. As old as structural order itself in the evolution of the universe, and an inseparable accompaniment of it at all stages, individuation as an evolutionary variation remains in the background, so to say, until the emergence of conscious Mind leads to a rapid and indeed phenomenal outgrowth of this hitherto minor feature. The appearance of Mind, therefore, especially at the human level where it is most marked, seems to constitute a break in the even and regular advance of Evolution, and to mark a new departure of a very far-reaching character. The fact is that in and with Mind a significant change takes place in the relative importance of the two fundamental aspects in Holism. While the aspect of order and regulation continues to develop and grow, the other aspect of individuation pushes relatively much more to the front, and in the latest human phase of evolution not only assumes a dominant importance in itself, but also begins to exert a far-reaching influence on the other feature of order and regulation. That it will and indeed must have such an 230- influence is at once intelligible from the fact that at bottom individuation and regulation are, as we have seen, dual aspects of the same inner process or activity, and any accentuation of the “ individuation ” factor must at once react on the other “ regulation ” factor. Thus it is that while in Nature order is of a mechanical character and in the world of life is of an automatic character, certain, regular and unfailing; in man, where the mental factor has come into its own, it is neither mechanical nor automatic, but of a new plastic variable type which we call conscious and voluntary. In fact the whole system of regulation and control is fundamentally transformed; new mental agencies seem to be at work and new categories of description and explanation become necessary. The appearance of conscious Mind has meant, not only an epoch-making development of the feature of individuality, but also and in consequence a new system of regulation and control, not so regular and automatic and effective as the older inorganic and organic systems, and still comparatively vacillating, irregular and uncertain in its action, but vastly more comprehensive and with a power which promises ultimately to give a complete command over the conditions of matter and life. There is a mastery in the new system of control such as was not dreamt of at earlier stages of Evolution. Organic regulation, however vast, elaborate and effective, has nothing of the sheer mastery and domination and free creative power which characterise the new control. Conscious planning on the mental level entirely revolutionises the situation and substitutes freedom and action for the fixed automatic behaviour and routine of the biological order.

These general remarks will serve to place Mind in the history of Evolution, and to show the nature of its relations to what has gone before and what is to follow. It marks a new departure not only in the feature of holistic regulation and control, to which so much attention has been paid in the foregoing chapters, but also and far more specially in the feature of individuation, which up to now has been of an insignificant character, but which from now on begins to assume a dominant position, and to give a new direction and character to the pre-existing system of organic regulation. Mind is not so much a direct continuation of the holistic advance on the previous lines of life as a fresh start, with a new factor pushed to the fore in the process, and a new orientation given to the whole movement. It marks the new stage of intensive individuation which becomes Personality; and at the same time it marks’ the new system of control which culminates in conscious rational Purpose as a function of Personality. Mind underlies and supports both these great closely related departures in the process of Evolution. Having thus indicated the general function and activity of Mind in the history of Evolution, let us now proceed to look more closely at its nature and character.

Mind has its earliest beginnings in the inorganic structures of Nature already. Disturbance of the equilibrium of physical structures leads, as we have seen, to a state of tension, and a tendency to compensation; and one phase of this tension and compensating movement is seen in the selective action which matter already exercises, and which, as explained in Chapter VII, becomes far more accentuated in the subsequent structures of life. This tension with its selective compensation is without a doubt the original stimulus and source of Mind as well as of life, but the evolution of life proceeded far more rapidly and completely outstripped Mind in the race which followed. Mind as a matter of fact needed the support of life for its full fruition, and was therefore dependent on the prior development of life. In the course of the subsequent developments- this tension underwent two radical changes which had far reaching effects, as they led directly to the evolution of Mind. In the first place, the tension in the life-structures or living bodies developed (in some unknown manner) an additional intensity which took the entirely new form of a vague sense of irritation or discomfort which began to accompany it. In other words, the tension or strain in the living bodies led to the epoch-making development of this vague sense of uneasiness or discomfort, which had the effect of strongly reinforcing and stimulating the efforts made for the removal of the strain. The successful effort, again, was accompanied by a sense of ease or comfort which must have been a real helpful stimulus and have had considerable survival value for the organisms that developed it. We see thus that the tension or strain came to be accompanied by vague feelings which radically transformed it and gave a different meaning and value to it. The feeling became a potent force working behind and inside the organic system for the removal of the tension or strain. This feeling or sense of comfort or discomfort must originally have been of the vaguest possible character, but at any rate it was a beginning, and indeed a revolutionary beginning, and it performed a useful function in reinforcing the automatic tendency for the removal of the strain or uneasiness. It marked an enormous step in advance, and is probably still exemplified in the “ tropisms ” which characterise the movements of the most primitive animal organisms

In the second place, the tension became t intensified in another direction. Instead of remaining merely a passive result of the state of disequilibrium, it became an active state or relation between the structure or body affected and the external cause of the affection or discomfort. The passive tension became an active ad-tension or attention, and in this transformation we reach the most primitive, most characteristic function of Mind. The living organism no longer suffers passively, blindly and in darkness, so to speak. The worm turns upon the source of its torture. The organism begins to attend to the source of its discomfort; and this attention, at first vague and diffused, gradually develops, until it becomes an awareness or low -form of awareness of its object, and consciousness in its most elementary form thus appears. In its most primitive form it showed itself at quite ah’ early stage in animal development, probably not long after sensori-motor mechanisms had been evolved.

These are the principal steps in the beginnings of Mind; and whatever immemorial periods this evolution may have taken, and whatever other intermediate phases it may have passed through, in the result the basis of Mind was well and truly laid in the rise of the power of attention, accompanied and stimulated by feelings of comfort or discomfort, and by a certain awareness or consciousness of the object to which attention was directed. As we saw in Chapter VI, it is one of the special effects of Holism to transform passivity into activity, and nowhere has that ’transformation had a more far-reaching character than in regard to the origin of attention as an active response on the part of organism from the passive state of tension which had preceded it. In this transformation we see not only what is perhaps the origin of mental activity but also a new departure in the system of power, of freedom and of control over its surroundings with which Mind is specially associated.

The actual steps in the evolution of Mind, in so far as they can be traced from available evidence, need not be discussed here in detail. No doubt we have to start with sporadic and uncertain variations in mere organic structural functioning as these become regular and stereotyped they assume the form, first of tropisms in plants and animals, and then of reflexes in the activity of special organs or cells. Then in the case of animals trains of reflexes are gradually co-ordinated into regular modes of activity of the organism as a whole, as instincts. Sensori-motor co-ordinations are effected, by which the passive influences and effects coming from the outside world are transformed into definite modes of active response by the organism. This active power of response enables the organism to strive more effectively for the satisfaction of its needs, endows it with a definite conative power, so to say. It begins to strive, to seek, to experiment and explore. The original reaction of inorganic, and then of organic, selectiveness has become a real function and capacity of conation. The originally vague and diffused feeling increases in volume and intensity and propels this striving or conation all the more effectively. The awareness or consciousness of objects becomes clearer; consciousness becomes a real illumination of outside objects which before were dark and unknown. It becomes the torch with which the organism explores its way in a dark and somewhat alien world. Consciousness thus increases the influence of the environment on the organism; and its correlative attention pari passu increases the power of response and the return influence which the organism can exercise over the environment. This mental activity continues to grow in its double inner and outer aspects, its inner capacity of attention and active reaction, and its outward-facing capacity of assimilating external materials in the form of awareness or consciousness of objects. A. metabolism of a higher order than that seen on the biological plane sets in; a new psychological structure has been evolved; and Mind starts on its active and creative career. No elaboration of the steps sketched here can be attempted, and the details must be studied in works dealing with Biology and with animal and human Psychology. We are concerned with the underlying processes and the general character of their results. Details must be left to the special sciences.

I have traced Mind to its dual source, and wish now to draw attention to the consequent duality of Mind itself. Holism on the advanced psychic plane discloses two distinct though interdependent tendencies--the one individual, the other universal--and Mind shows both these contrasted characters, and faces in both apparently opposed directions. Psychologically the duality of Mind is best expressed in the Subject-Object relation which is fundamental for Mind. Consciousness as it develops splits up the indefinite mass of experience into two definite aspects: the self or Subject, which is conscious or attending, the Object, which it attends to or is conscious of. “ The Subject--conscious of--an Object ” is thus a general formula for all experience of a mental character. The Subject is not before the Object, nor the Object before the Subject, but both arise simultaneously and pari passu in the mental activity which we call consciousness. The world is not the creature and result of the Mind, as idealists would have it; nor is the Mind the resultant of external stimuli on the brain, as the materialists would have it. Experience is one; and experience as it becomes conscious differentiates or unfolds itself into the Subject-Object relation. They are the double aspects of experience at its conscious level, and reflect but the duality of the source of Mind itself. The inmost nature and essence of Mind is this activity which appears as consciousness and the Subject and Object aspects which crystallise out of it in experience. They are at bottom and in real truth not independents, but dependent correlates in the psychic medium called consciousness. A clear and firm realisation of this fundamental fact is basic for all true science and philosophy alike. We saw in Chapter VII what insoluble problems arise both for science and thought from hypostatising Mind and Body as independent reals or substances. Here we are at the tap-root of this source of error. Mind-and-Body is but a particular form of the general Subject-Object situation. They are not independents, they are interdependents; they are poles in the field of Mind; they -are elements or rather aspects of the same reality given in solution in experience and precipitated from it by consciousness. Out of this fundamental unity Mind in the larger sense has elaborated our experience of both the inner and outer worlds, of the self and the external universe. It is the business of psychology to show how this has been done, and to trace the progressive stages in this constructive process. For me it is only necessary here to emphasise that no correct interpretation of experience is possible unless we bear in mind that both the Subject and Object aspects are absolutely essential to it. Subject and Object are held together in experience as necessary elements in the unity of Holism from which both are differentiated. Neither element can be ignored in our reading and exploration of experience. The Einstein standpoint of Relativity is not only the soundest science, it is fundamental to psychology. The world in experience is at bottom my reading of the world in which I am the centre of reference, where the system of co-ordinates of measurement is my private system; and the space, time and experience which go to the making of it are my space, time and experience. Objectivity and universality are indeed attainable, but only from a subjective and individual starting-point and centre of reference. Individuation is bound up with reality on the psychic plane. What has been looked upon as a reproach to psychology, namely, the essentially subjective standpoint which rules it, the self which it discloses as central to all our experience of reality, now appears to be equally necessary for all the other sciences as well. Natural Science, which has always prided itself on its objectivity and freedom from all subjective considerations, now finds that after all psychology has been right; that the despised subject or Self of psychology is not only a real factor in the universe, but is central to all true knowledge of it. Here at last natural science and psychology can clasp hands and together in true partnership go forward on the great adventure of knowledge which is their common task. Their separation has been a calamity to both; their reunion will prove fruitful beyond our fondest dreams. Einstein’s great achievement is but the first-fruits of that reunion. Let us for a moment look a little more closely at this individualistic aspect of Holism in its higher developments. We have seen how it begins as physical and chemical affinities and selectivities; later on in the region of life we saw it appearing as organic selection and appetitiveness. On the mental level again it emerges as a certain striving, a seeking, a conativeness, which, when attention has risen to the level of consciousness, becomes purposive. Thereafter the individual no longer floats forward on inorganic or organic drifts, tendencies and appetites, but begins to direct his course according to conscious voluntary purposes. The individual makes his own plans and no longer automatically follows Nature’s plan. Conscious ends emerge; things the individual strives after as desirable and good attract him more than the unconscious organic urge behind, the vis a tergo, propels him; the pulls in front begin to dominate the pushes behind. The desired things become the Values, which intelligence illuminates and magnifies and emotions suffuse and intensify until they become the dominant Ideals of action. We see the rise not only of new mental activities but of new categories such as Purpose and Value, which were not possible or necessary on the organic level. It is evident that these new activities, such as attention, consciousness, intelligence, emotion and will, as well as the new categories which accompany them, are all in line with the individuational development of Holism, and mark so to say a deviation from the direct line of organic regulation and systematic co-ordination which characterised Holism in its earlier organic development. They make directly for the development of the individual, of the self, of the Personality. Holism seems for the moment to depart from its vast plan of extensive co-ordination and harmonisation in order to foster little centres of intensive Wholeness in individuals, to place the little wholes before the great Whole, and to abandon universality for individuality. In fact the largely individualistic nature of Mind makes it apparently a deviation from the universal order. Mind appears as a rebel in the universe, whose self-centredness and purposeful striving might and largely does make for disharmony and disorder rather than for peace, order and harmony. Thus the great Ethical problem arises; thus the conflict between individual ends and purposes on the one hand and universal claims and rights on the other comes to the surface on the psychic plane of Evolution. Mind the rebel has appeared, Self the anarchist has emerged, and the ancient order of the universe is profoundly disturbed. The new psychic individualistic situation applies a most searching test to the foundations of the holistic universe. The war in heaven has broken out, the archangels have revolted. Who will win, and what is the character of the new peace going to be? Such is the question which we now proceed to consider.

The first and most important point to make is that we should not be misled by our own metaphors. Individuation is but an aspect and no more, is but one aspect of the holistic advance. The other, universal, aspect remains of fundamental importance throughout, although for the moment it may be and probably is pushed somewhat into the background. The two aspects are complementary and interdependent, and each has a vital grip on the other. The individual is going to be universalised, the universal is going to be individualised, and thus from both directions the whole is going to be enriched. The individual development is necessary for the advance. Organic regulation, however great an advance on inorganic structural order, is not enough. It is still too mechanical and rigid; it is still too external in character. It must acquire new characters of intemality; there must be more self-regulation and less external regulation. There must be more inner intensive mobility, more plasticity and less rigid regulation. Higher quality must arise. Plasticity, freedom, creativeness are necessary for the new groupings and structures which are to arise on the psychic level. The higher metabolism of mind demands more freedom from the routine of organic regulation. The area and degrees of freedom must be indefinitely enlarged, and in the Self a new organiser of victory must be constituted. That is the one side of the dual advance; but the other is there all the time and in the end just as important. Thus there must also be a higher order, a more developed and enriched universality, a more coherent objectivity. More wholeness not only means a deeper, more intensive individuality in the Self, but also a more perfect order in the structure of Reality. And the two must interpenetrate each other and mutually transform each other in that unity which is the whole. And that is exactly what happens in the evolution of mind in man and animals, and in the development of mind in the human individual. The selfish appetite is gradually curbed and subdued and co-ordinated with other motives; the conative activity is not merely self-regarding but gradually becomes linked with the interests of others, and finally becomes an impersonal endeavour towards the Good. A new era of adjustments and co-ordinations sets in, and the individual on the psychic plane pursues the double task of self-perfection and perfection of the All. And the two mutually and reciprocally influence and modify each other and shape an ideal of Good which incorporates elements from both. Holism has narrowed itself into the individual only thereby to advance to a more perfect all-embracing order. The apparent retreat to the individual level is merely for the purpose of a greater advance towards wholeness. The newer, deeper Self becomes the centre for a fresh ordering and harmony of the universal.

The possibility for this great transformation is given in the very nature of Mind; for Mind is not merely conative and purposive. It is also rational, it is the basis of the Reason. And Reason becomes the basis of the new order in the universe. It is not only the principle of order in the Self, but also the link which binds the Self and the Not-self into a whole. Reason is the organ of universality, of the deeper, more intensive universality of the spirit. Reason is largely creative of the new structures of Reality and Truth. In the Reason, Mind, instead of pursuing its individualistic, purposive activity, resumes the primeval march of Holism towards more regulation, a higher coordination and a greater order. Our will is the urge towards self-expression, and is therefore the organ of individuality. “ Our wills are ours to make them Thine.” In other words, our will is individualistic and has to be harmonised and through effort and struggle to be adjusted to higher ethical and spiritual ends and ideals. But our Reason is in its very essence more than individual; it is expressive of universality; it is a part of that Order which regulates the universe, and in a deep sense it is a creative factor or co-creator of that Order. Through our Reason we partake of universality and are members of the everlasting Order of the universal.

Mind in its rational as distinguished from its purely conative activity is in the direct line of Evolution from organic regulation: psychic reason is the direct descendant of organic regulation. This would appear from the simple fact that the central nervous system is the physiological organ of regulation and co-ordination in the living body; and the brain, which is nothing but the crowning development of the nervous system, is again the organ and physiological correlate of Mind. In other words, as the brain is merely a development of the nervous system, so the Mind is nothing but a development of prior organic regulation. Mind qua Reason is thus the organising principle, the principle of central control and co-ordination, and carries on the tradition and evolution of Holism in the direct line, so to say.

And in the entire range of its rational activity Mind shows the same synthetic co-ordinating character. This could easily be proved by running through the psychological functions, ranging from their beginnings in attention and passing through sensation, perception, imagination, conception, and on to judgment or reasoning. In every case an ordering synthetic activity is at work producing structural masses of experience arranged on definite ascertainable principles of selection and grouping. These products of the rational activity of Mind are not mere artificial aggregates, mere assemblages of psychological items arranged according to mechanical principles or so-called laws of association or rules of logic. On the contrary, they are synthetic unities of an advanced holistic character. A percept or an image or a concept is a holistic unity, built up out of a mass of materials, on definite principles of cohesion and co-ordination. So too is a judgment. It is the business of psychology to study these syntheses and their structures, and the principles according to which they are formed and connected with each other. Mind in its rational activity is thus synthetic and co-ordinative through and through, and its products are synthetic, organic and holistic in a marked degree.

Mind the organiser transforms, reorganises and reconstitutes even the individualist Self. The rebel in the end has to submit and swear fealty to the controlling power. Indeed the purely individualist Self or mere individual is a figment of abstraction. For the Self only comes to realisation and consciousness of itself, not alone and in individual isolation and separateness, but in society, among other selves with whom it interacts in social intercourse. I would never come to know myself and be conscious of my separate individual identity were it not that I become aware of others like me: consciousness of other selves is necessary for consciousness of self or self-consciousness. The individual has therefore a social origin in experience. Nay, more, it is through the use of the purely social instrument of language that I rise above the mere immediacy of experience and immersion in the current of my experience. Language gives names to the items of my experience, and thus through language they are first isolated and abstracted from the continuous body of my experience. Through the naming power of language, again, several items of experience can be grouped together under one name, which becomes distinctive of their general resemblances, in disregard of their minor differences. In other words, the power of forming general concepts becomes possible only through the social instrument of language. Thus the entire developed apparatus of thought with which I measure the universe and garner an untold wealth of personal experience is not my individual equipment and possession, but a socially developed instrument which I share with the rest of my fellows. Nay, my very self, so uniquely individual in appearance, is, as I have said, largely a social construction, and rounded out of the social intercourse and psychical interaction with my fellows. The individual Self or Personality rests not on its individual foundations but on the whole universe. Psychology conclusively proves that, and Holism but accentuates it by tracing the individual to his sources in the whole. The individual Self is not singular, springing from one root, so to say. It combines an infinity of elements growing out of the individual endowment and experience on the one hand and the social tradition and experience on the other. All these elements are fused and metabolised into a holistic unity which becomes a unique centre in the universe and, in a real sense, of the universe. Nowhere in the world do we find a greater intensity of the holistic effect produced than in the individual Self or Personality. And yet even there it is by no means complete, for the individual Personality, as we shall see, still shows a discordance of elements which leads to most of the great problems of thought and conduct. The point I am trying to make, however, is that the apparently individualist Mind is in reality deeply and vitally influenced by the universal Mind; and that the individual self only comes to its own through the rational and social self which relates it organically to the rest of the universe. It is rooted in and dependent on the greater whole, and only to a minor extent a rebel against its controlling influence. The immense power of Mind is shown in the way in which, out of the simple data of the rudimentary Self and its experiences, it has raised the noble superstructure of the human Personality. Mind here appears as the great creative artist. But it is more than that; for its work is no mere picture of reality, but is reality itse|f. It is the great archetype of the artist, and it has this pure creative power because it is but a form, a phase of the supreme creative activity in the universe. When Mind comes to apply its conceptual system to its experience of the world, we see the same synthetic holistic activity at work. At first crude, naive experience is simply taken at its face value, and from it a rough empirical order is constructed which is sufficiently correct for all ordinary purposes, and may fairly be called the world of common sense. Of course even this common-sense empirical order will vary widely at different levels of culture. But in every case it is a rough first approximation and a grouping, ordering and arranging of experience according to the standards and the needs of the common man at that level of mental culture. It is a more or less faithful reading of ordinary experience, and although it contains many discrepancies and contradictions, it is on the whole a more or less connected, coherent Weltanschauung* with a fair correspondence to the facts of direct observation.

From this common-sense world of experience is gradually evolved a more correct and refined system of experience. Anomalies are gradually eliminated and the logical rational character of the system increases. And this refinement continues until in the scientific conceptual system the empirical common-sense order is completely overhauled and reconstructed. In this system scientific concepts and entities corresponding to nothing in empirical experience become of fundamental importance, because without them not only empirical experience but also the more refined observations of Science become utterly unintelligible. The matters dealt with in most of the preceding chapters belong to the scientific conceptual system, as they base the world of experience on real or hypothetical entities and factors which, although they lie beyond the world of direct experience, are yet necessary for the rational order and coherence and comprehension of the facts which do fall within the range of ordinary and refined scientific experience. In this system not only is the seen order made to depend on an unseen order of ideas of extraordinary refinement, but the immense movements and changes of the universe are referred to a very small number of fundamental principles which appear to govern all happening in the universe. From this esoteric system to which Science is more and more tending have been removed most of the anomalies, incoherences and discrepancies of the empirical order. Many final difficulties still remain, some of which may perhaps never be eliminated. But on the whole the system of Science is rapidly becoming a great rational body of experience and thought, closely articulated in all its details, and held together by simple principles of the widest sweep. The system as a whole represents the proudest achievement of the Mind in its rational activity as the regulative co-ordinating principle in the universe. Mind as the principle of the rational construction of the universe here reaches its highest expression. Professor L, T. Hobhouse in his great work on Development and Purpose has with a master’s hand traced the development and interpretation of experience from its humble naive beginnings to its culmination in the vast conceptual system of Science. I must here rest content with the preceding summary statement. What I have said will, however, I hope, suffice to show that Mind the Rebel is only one aspect of holistic activity; and that Mind the Organiser, Mind the Central Control in our experience of the world is the other equally true complementary aspect. Behind both aspects is that inner creative Holism which has flowered into the human Mind and Personality on the one hand and into the grandeur of form and content of the world on the other. The theory of Holism thus carries the scientific system of experience another step further, and tries to read in the riddles of Science still deeper and more ultimate concepts of reality.

Mind has been here described as a new variation or mutation or series of mutations in holistic Evolution, in some respects antithetic to and at variance with its main trend. But its final result is immensely to enrich the main process. Mind has made ail the difference to the later and latest stages of Evolution. Without Mind the organic and regulative process of the world, vast and magnificent in any case, would have been at best but a tame affair. The world would have moved forward, as it were in a dream, with an unearthly regularity and majesty of movement. Its process would have become ever more complicated fand ever more frictionless, as of some sublime animated machine, great beyond all power of conception. All elements of discord and disharmony would have passed away from its vast cosmic routine. But it would have gone on sublimely unconscious of itself. It would have had no soul or souls; it would have harboured no passionate exaltations; no poignant regrets or bitter sorrows would have disturbed its profound peace. For it neither the great lights nor the deep shadows. Truth and Beauty would have been there, but unknown, unseen, unloved. They would have been cold and passionless like the distant stars, and would never have become the great ideals thrilling and inspiring men and women to deathless action. Love would have been there, but not the immortal emotion which mortals call by that name. Into that great dream-garden of Eden, Mind the disturber has entered, and with Mind sin and sorrow, faith and love, the great vision of knowledge, and the conscious effort to master all hampering conditions and to work out the great redemption. To the music of the universe there has thus’ been added a new note, as of laughter and tears, a new undertone of the human, which transforms and enriches all the rest. It is no longer a song of the Golden Reign of the Elder Gods, but of the intertwining of the Cosmos with human Destiny, of the suffering which has become consecrated and illuminated by the great visions, of the magic power of knowledge to work out new enchantments, to break the dumb routine, to set the captive spirit free, and to blaze new paths to the immortal Goal. Mind has thus added an infinity of light and shade and colour, of inward character and conscious content to the great process in and from which it has emerged. Without Mind the universe would have been an altogether dull affair, however Unimaginably grand in other respects. Even its aberrations have been woven into the new harmonies; its eye has beheld the greater lights, and knowledge has given it the key of power and mastery over the conditions which previously towered inexpugnably athwart its path of progress.

Let us dwell for a moment on this new power and mastery which Mind has brought on the scene. Knowledge is power, and it is unnecessary for us here to trace in detail the steps by which the present power and mastery of Science over material conditions have been acquired. Life below the mental level strengthens the innate capacity to react to external influences of a Harmful or beneficial nature by various movements which lead successively to the tropisms, reflexes and automatisms of the lower organisms. When Mind appears as an active factor, this power of regulating movements is greatly enlarged and intensified, until we see the sureness and delicacy of the instinctive reactions which. characterise Mind in its subconscious levels. It is, however, when consciousness appears that an immense accession to this power of control is brought about. Consciousness, as we have seen, is a power of illuminating objects in the field of experience. The organism through this power of illumination can. gradually arrive at a fair knowledge of its surroundings in so far as they are harmful or beneficial to it. Its power of selection is thus more surely guided, and it learns to know accurately and easily what to avoid and what to welcome. When the human level is reached a revolution in the conditions of knowledge is effected. The human mind can make its own combinations and correlations from the materials with which it finds itself surrounded. It can, therefore, in a large sense make or mould its own environmental conditions, and thus eliminate or neutralise hostile influences and reinforce favourable conditions. This is already the case on the empirical level of knowledge; it is far more the case where the empirical stage has been passed and the developed scientific stage has been reached. Here the mind does not wait on events, but builds and creates events through its control of the appropriate conditions. In this way the development of the several sciences has meant continuous increase, not only of knowledge, but of real power over the material and other conditions of life. Here again Mind the Organiser or Correlator has shown its creative power in shaping the conditions which surround its activity. Instead of being the slave of these conditions it gains a more or less complete mastery over them. It can at will bring about those combinations and selections which will assist or further its purposes, and it can, through selective manipulation of the surrounding conditions, neutralise or cancel out any which are unfavourable to the execution of its aims. Knowledge thus becomes an efficient instrument of the will; and where the will itself is nobly trained, guided and controlled, the individual acquires and wields an almost unlimited power for Good. Thus is freedom at last achieved over the dominance of the conditions of life, and Mind assumes the sovereignty to which it had been destined from the beginning as the successor to Life and Matter.

In the exercise of its free and unhampered right of self-determination, Mind on the human level proceeds’ to create to a large extent the appropriate conditions for its own development. Instead of remaining dependent on the natural environment, Mind builds up a vast social environment for itself. It builds up a far-reaching social structure with institutions of all sorts which are intended to develop and educate the human groups and individuals, intellectually and morally, to facilitate intercourse and co-operation among them, to declare and safeguard their rights, and to protect them against the hostile influences of the animate or inanimate environment and of other groups of humans. Thus language arises as well as the institutions of marriage and the family, of religion, law and government, and all the other numerous forms into which social beliefs and practices are embodied. The very laws of organic Evolution seem to be modified by this great transformation. In the organic sphere we saw the individual adapting itself or being adapted to the environment as the imperative condition of its survival. Here we see the environment being more and more adapted to the individual. The individual appears as the creator,, the environment as the creature, the house it makes for its habitation, so to speak. In the organic sphere, we saw the individual inheritance and variations incorporated into the individual organic structure and thus preserved for the future. Here we see social traditions take the place of this individual structural heredity. The human individual does not find himself over-burdened with an impossible structure, with a load of inheritance which would be more than he could bear. The load is mainly shifted on to the ampler shoulders of the social tradition. The human individual has the good luck to find himself born into an environment which largely performs the hereditary function, and all that he is called upon to do is to assimilate this environment, and so to obtain command of its gathered resources. Language, customs, writing, literature, history, knowledge and empirical practice are all storehouses of traditional information at the disposal of the human individual who learns their use. Heredity with the human individual comes more and more to mean, not (as in the case of animals) the predisposition or capacity to act or react in certain definite ways, but the general capacity of experience, the capacity to learn or acquire in the individual life the power to act in an indefinite number of ways. In the human inheritance general educability takes the place of definite specific hereditary functions. Whereas an animal is born with the ability to perform a certain limited number of functions, the human individual is born with The general capacity of educability or being educated to learn an indefinite number of functions in his lifetime. The animal is still under the domination of his physical structure, and in his action is limited to the functions inherited with this structure, with a very limited range of learning new actions. The human individual, on the contrary, finds himself but little restricted in his development by his hereditary structure, and finds himself blest with an almost unlimited adaptability and capacity for experience and knowledge. In other words, the inheritance of Mind supersedes the organic inheritance more and more. With an animal definite modes of functioning are inherited; with the human individual general mental plasticity is chiefly inherited. And the definite specific modes of functioning which an animal inherits with his physiological structure, the human individual learns and acquires from the social tradition into which he is born. Nothing shows more clearly the revolution which the appearance of Mind has wrought than this far-reaching transformation which it has effected in the methods and procedure of organic Evolution. On the animal plane structure still largely determines function, but on the human plane mental plasticity so dominates everything else in the inheritance that the importance of structure is completely dwarfed, and it appears as a subordinate factor in the total human situation. Even so, however, it retains a great importance which often comes out in dark and unexpected ways in the individual conduct.

The advent of Mind has undoubtedly meant a large correlated development of structure, especially in the human nervous system and brain, which is, of course, far larger and more complex than that of even the highest anthropoid. But even so the role of structure is comparatively less prominent in man than it is at earlier phases of organic Evolution, and its functions have not only been fundamentally transformed, as we have just seen, but have also relatively vastly increased in significance. So much so indeed that structure in man becomes of merely secondary importance, while its mental functions become all-important. The superstructure of Mind is immeasurably greater than the brain or neural structure on which it rests, and is something of a quite different order, which marks a revolutionary departure from the organic order whence it originated. Under these circumstances the question of primacy as between the Mind and the brain is deprived of all real importance. It is not a question of origins but of values, to which there can be but one answer. By whatever standard of value it is measured, Mind has risen above its physiological source as high as, or even higher than, life has risen above its inorganic beginnings.

From the question of structure we pass naturally on to consider the “ field ” of Mind. The field of Mind differs in character from the field of matter or of organism. It is neither physical nor physiological, no more than Mind itself is. Mind is a new type of structure of the immaterial or spiritual kind, and so also is its field. In Mind there is a central illuminated area, the area of full consciousness, which is directly open to inspection and observation. Taking this area as the central structure of Mind, the “ Held ” of Mind then comes to mean that area of its functions and activities which falls below the “ threshold ” of, consciousness, which remains unilluminated and dark, which cannot, therefore, be known by direct inspection and which, as in the cases of the other fields, can only be ascertained by its indirect effects. The field of Mind in this sense has been the subject of much psychological speculation and discussion, and we may therefore here rest content with a very summary statement, which will as far as possible be confined to the holistic aspects of subconscious mental activity.

The activities of Mind below the level of consciousness are most important for Mind as a whole. It is in this subconscious area or field of its activities that Mind especially feels the pressure of the past and to some extent the pull of the future. The time factor is even more important for the field of Mind than it is for the other fields previously considered. The central structure of Mind functions in the full blaze of consciousness in the present; but it is surrounded by a field of the greatest importance where the past and the future respectively hold sway. Mind, therefore, integrates the past and the future with the present; mental activity is a synthesis which unifies all its time in the present moment of ’functioning. And it is thus enabled to act with far more holistic effect than either matter or life is able to do. Let us consider for a moment the influence which the past and the future exercise on the present in mental activity.

The contribution of the past is twofold In the first place there is the experience of the past in the individual life which has fallen into the background of the Mind and is no longer directly remembered. Yet this experience, as is well known, has a most powerful influence on the conscious present of the experiencing subject. Even the unremembered past experience is not dead, but alive and active below the level of consciousness. In the debating chamber of the present it may not speak, but it votes, and its silent vote is often decisive. Mind does not work in water-tight compartments, its past experience is integral with its present action. Its procedure is entirely massive, integral, holistic. Memory, the great basic bond of individuality, binding together and fusing all the past phases and experience of the individual with the present into one unique whole which is himself, operates below as well as above the level of consciousness; essentially it forgets nothing and leaves behind nothing of the past. Remembered or unremembered, the past exerts its full force on the present experience.

The second contribution of the past comes from farther back. It is the contribution of the hereditary structure as modified by ancestral experience, which lies behind all individual experience. And in many ways its contribution is even more significant than that of past individual experience. It gives us our’ fundamental bias, our points of view, our temperament, our instinctive reactions and our particular individual ways of looking at persons and things. There is in each human individual a distinctive basis of Personality composed of these elements which cannot be traced to individual experience and which is given by his hereditary structure and ancestral past. In many ways it is the most important part of our personal make-up. It is not conscious or critical or rational in its activity, but it constitutes the permanent background of the Mind and the Personality behind all individual experience and development. Experience, reasoning, criticism usually make no impression on it. I like or dislike somebody instinctively and at first sight, and nothing thereafter alters my attitude to him. There is nothing analytical about it, and its action is purely massive. Generally the result of this massive hereditary memory could be best described as a “ feel ” or sensing, an intuitive reading or subconscious intuitive insight of a person or thing or situation, which cannot be further analysed to any good purpose. Great wisdom and judgment no less than prejudices and passions usually have their source in that distant past and rest on no analysable evidence in the individual experience. It will thus be seen that this contribution of the hereditary past is also decidedly of a holistic character. The importance given to it by the recent development of Psychoanalysis need only be mentioned here.

What has been said so far will be generally admitted. To me, however, there is something even more decidedly holistic in the hereditary factor. To me the ordinary senses do not exhaust the possibilities of sensuous intuition in the human mind. These senses have been differentiated and evolved out of a common pool; but the pool has not in consequence dried up and ceased to be the ultimate sensuous source of Holism in the human Mind. Is it a far-fetched idea to assume that behind the special senses and their evolution, and pari passu with their evolution, the mother sense from which they were evolved has also silently continued to grow and evolve as the binding, uniting, cementing element among the deliverances of the special senses? There is a subtle, profound, synthetic activity at work among our sensations and intuitions which cannot be ascribed to the ordinary conscious activities of the Mind. All the wholes we see in life as persons or things are composed of contributions from all or most of the special senses, so utterly fused with each other that disentanglement becomes practically impossible. And these uniquely unitary wholes exist for us from the early beginnings of sensation and perception. So, for instance, the unique whole of the mother is present to the young baby from the early weeks of its life. Is there not some subtle fusing, unifying sense at work pari passu with the several differentiated senses? Is there not a sixth sense, the sensus communis from which the others have been derived without exhausting it, and whose development has kept pace with their development? Such a sense would not be particularly noticed, as its activity would be masked by that of the other senses and is ordinarily and as a matter of course apt to be ascribed to and apportioned among the other senses. But the coherence of the deliverances of the several senses and their fusion into unitary wholes cannot be ascribed to some assumed attraction for each other on their part! It is the Mind which fuses and unites them; and if it is the mind, it must be a sensuous element or factor in the mind over and above these specialised senses. To me it seems a simple and plausible idea that there is in the mind more power of sensation and intuition of the synthetic type than is to be found in or between the special senses. Otherwise I find the unities underlying both the subject and’ objects of experience inexplicable. I am not sure that our massive sense of reality, of the reality of the external world, for instance, is not to be traced in a large measure to the influence of this deeper sense behind the other senses.

Psychologists believe in a general sensibility which shows itself not only in the vague internal organic sensations, but also in the other diffused states of our bodies resulting from light or warmth or other physical conditions. They have, however, as far as I am aware, not given sufficient attention to the subject, which seems to me of great importance in the synthetic make-up of Mind.

The obscure subject of Telepathy seems to me to fall within the “ field ” of Mind, and possibly to involve a form of sensuous intuition which cannot be attributed to any of the special senses. It is possible that the form of sense which becomes active in Telepathy is closer to thought than the ordinary senses, that it lies between thought and these senses, and that its subtle activity reveals the thought where these senses cannot do so. In short, it may be in the nature of what has been called an “ intellectual intuition/’ Just as all sensation involves thought, so all thought involves obscure diffused sensation. And it is possible that in this area of obscure sensation at the bottom or on the fringe of thought the explanation of telepathic sensation may lie. And subjects who have this form of sensitiveness may sense the thought itself or other conscious experience of other individuals without communication in the ordinary ways of the senses. This sensitiveness may be a form of the above-mentioned universal sensus communis, the nature and functions of which are of great importance for the mind as a whole and are well worth exploring by psychology. Here I can only mention the matter in passing.

So much for the contribution of the past to the present conscious activity of Mind. It will be noticed that it is of a highly synthetic or holistic character and that, whether it operates as subconscious sensation or subconscious judgment, it supplies much of the cement which Mind requires for its constructions and syntheses on the conscious level.

The most significant element, however, in the “ field ” of Mind concerns the future, and makes the future an operative factor in the present mental activity. Mind does. this through purpose; purpose is the function of Mind by which it contemplates some future desired end and makes the idea of this end exert its full force in the present. Thus I form a purpose to go on a hunting expedition for my next holiday, and this purpose forms a complex synthesis and sets going a whole series of plans and actions all intended to give effect to the purpose. Thus in purpose the future as an object in my mind becomes operative in the present and sets going and controls a long train of acts leading up to the execution of the purpose. The conscious purpose, the end as deliberately envisaged and intended, falls, of course, within the conscious inner area of Mind; but numerous subsidiary elements in the plan would operate subconsciously and thus affect only the field of Mind.

It will be noticed that purpose or purposive activity involves much more than merely the influence of the future on the present. Purpose is the most complete proof of the freedom and creative power of the mind in respect of its material and other conditions, of its power to create its own conditions and to bring about its own situations for its own free activities, My purposive action is action which I have myself planned, which is not impressed on m or dictated to me by external necessity, and for the performance of which I take my own self-chosen measures. Through purpose the mind becomes at last master in its own house, with the power to carry out its own wishes and shape its own course, uninfluenced by the conditions of the environment.

Again, purposive activity is peculiarly holistic. Elements both of the actual past and of anticipated future experience are fused with the present experience into one individual act, which as a conscious object of the mind dominates the entire situation within the purview of the purpose or plan. It involves not only sensations and perceptions, but also’ concepts of a complex character, feelings and desires in respect of the end desired, and volitions in respect of the act intended; and all these elements are fused and blended into one unique purpose, which is then put into action or execution. Purpose is thus probably the highest, most complex manifestation of the free, creative, holistic activity of Mind. Purpose is the door through which Mind finally escapes from the house of bondage and enters the free realm of its own sovereignty. The purposive teleological order is the domain of the ’ free creative spirit, in which the ethical, spiritual, ideal nature of Mind has free scope for expansion and development., The realm of Ends, as Kant has called it, the realm of the great Values and Ideals is the destined home of Mind. And Holism it is that has guided the faltering foot-steps of Mind from its early organic responses and strivings and automatisms through the most amazing adventures and developments until at last it enters into its own.

Let me conclude with a few further remarks on the holistic aspect of mental activity.

In Chapters VI, VII and VIII I endeavoured to show, I trust not quite in vain, how Holism as a concept and an active factor can be made fruitful in biology, and can give us a method of dealing with the problems of life which may largely facilitate the proper solutions. The problems of Mechanism, of Body and Mind, of Evolution, and many others, all wear a. different and more tractable form when viewed from the standpoint of Holism. I think I may fairly claim that the concept and function of Holism will prove even more valuable in the study of Mind, its activities and problems. Mind as a higher, more evolved organ of Holism will naturally exemplify the holistic standpoint more fully than life does. And the holistic conception of mental activity appears to me to be specially helpful and to steer clear of most of the errors and misconceptions which have beset that difficult subject. The holistic conception of mental functioning explains at once why all the psychological activities--from attention to judgment, and not only in intelligence but also in volition, action and emotion --are synthetic in character, and result in associations, syntheses, groups, things, events, bodies and wholes. It was the unique service of Kant to psychology to discover the presence of the synthetic judgment at work already in the earliest forms of sensation and intuition; and he signalised his discovery by applying to the subject in experience the truly Olympian name of the “ synthetic unity of apperception ” The view of Mind as Holism leads straight to the same result, and quite simply and without the necessity to resort to any cumbrous psychological or metaphysical apparatus. The activity of Mind at all stages and in all forms is holistic, structural and synthetic, and its products show the same characters. The discriminative, selective, ordering, synthetic character which mental activity shows in all its higher operations is already fully present in its early beginnings, and flows indeed from its very nature as Holism. The various mental functions as dealt with in psychology, therefore, are simply so many examples of holistic activity on the mental plane. Analysis and discrimination may appear to be unholistic, but even they are but means to an end in the synthetic process; the analysed and discriminated elements being but a stepping-stone to more effective selective syntheses and groupings. It would be both interesting and useful to run through the various psychological activities and to show how they all exemplify and indeed flow from the nature and concept of Holism. The task would be easy, but it must be left to others. A good deal of interesting work in this direction has already been done by advocates of the “ Gestalt ” or Configuration psychology. In this sketch of the subject of Holism I can but confine myself to tracing the larger outlines, and leave particular clues to be followed up by others who may feel interested in the subject.

Equally fruitful, in my opinion, will the application of Holism prove to the problems of metaphysics and the other higher disciplines of Mind. There is not a problem of Metaphysics, of Ethics, of Art and even of Religion which will not’ benefit enormously from contact with the concept of Holism. Indeed the concept and standpoint of Holism may transform many of their fundamental concepts and render obsolete many of the somewhat barren analytical speculations which are still current in philosophy. In this place I must be content with this reference to the possibilities which lie along the path of holistic argument and research. These applications of the concept of Holism lie beyond the scope of the present work.
