---
title: "The Reform of Fundamental Concepts"
chapter: 1
---

Summary: In spite of the great advances which have been made in knowledge, some fundamental gaps still remain; matter, life and mind still remain utterly disparate phenomena. Yet the concepts of all three arise in experience, and in the human all three meet and apparently intermingle, so that real links must exist between them. Reformed concepts of all three are wanted. This will come from fuller scientific knowledge, and especially from a re-survey of the material from new points of view. The fresh outlook must accompany the collection of further detailed knowledge, and nowhere is the new outlook more urgently required than in the survey of these great divisions of knowledge.

Take Evolution as a case in point. The acceptance of Evolution as a fact, the origin of life-structures from the inorganic, must mean a complete revolution in our idea of matter. If matter holds the promise and potency of life and mind it is no longer the old matter of the physical materialists. We have accepted Evolution, but have failed to make the fundamental readjustment in our views which that acceptance involves.

Nineteenth-century science went wrong mostly because of the hard and narrow concept of causation which dominated it. It was a fixed dogma that there could be no more in the effect than there was in the cause; hence creativeness and real progress became impossible. The narrow concept of causation again arose from a wider intellectual error of abstraction, of narrowing down all concepts into hard definite contours and wiping out their indefinite surrounding "fields.” The concept of "fields” is absolutely necessary in order to get back to the fluid plastic facts of nature. The elimination of their "fields" in which things and concepts alike meet and intermingle creatively made all understanding of real connections and inter-actions impossible. The double mistake of analysis, and abstraction or generalisation has led to a departure in thought from the fluid procedure of nature. Abstract procedure with its narrowing of concepts and processes into hard -and rigid outlines, and their rounding off into definite scientific counters, temporarily simplified the problems of science and thought, but we have outlived the utility of this procedure, and for further advance we have now to return to the more difficult but more correct view of the natural plasticity and fluidity of natural things and processes. From this new view-point a resurvey will be made in the sequel of our ideas relating to matter, life and mind, and an attempt will be made to reach the fundamental unity and continuity which underlie and connect all three. We shall thus come to see all three as connected steps in the same great Process, the nature and functions of which will be investigated.

AMONG the great gaps in knowledge those which separate the phenomena of matter, life, and mind still remain unbridged. Matter, life, and mind remain utterly unlike each other. Apparently indeed their differences are ultimate, and nowhere does there appear a bridge for thought from one to the other. And their utter difference and disparateness produce the great breaks in knowledge, and separate knowledge into three quite different compartments. And yet they are all three in experience, and cannot therefore be so utterly unlike and alien to each other. What is more, they actually intermingle and co-exist in the human, which is compounded of matter, life, and mind. If indeed there were no common basis to matter, life, and mind, their union in the human individual would be the greatest mystery of all. What is in fact united in human experience and in human existence cannot be so infinitely far asunder in human thought, unless thought and fact are absolutely incongruous. Not only do they actually co-exist and mingle in the human, they appear to be genetically related and to give rise to each other in a definite series in the stages of Evolution; life appearing to arise in or from matter, and mind in or from life. The actual transitions have not been observed, but are assumed to have taken place under certain conditions in the course of cosmic Evolution. Hence arise the three series in the real world: physical, biological and psychical or mental. These psychological and factual connections between them tend to show that they cannot be fundamentally alien and irreconcilable, and that some sort of a bridge between them must be possible, unless we are to assume that our human experience is indeed a mere chaotic jumble of disconnected elements.

As the incongruity" does not arise from the facts either of experience or of existence, the problem is one for our thought and our science. The solution must therefore ultimately depend on our more extended knowledge of these series and the discovery of interconnections between them. The great darknesses and gaps in experience are mostly due to ignorance. Our experience is clear and luminous only at certain points which are separated by wide regions of obscurity; hence the apparent mystery of the luminous points and of their isolation and unlikeness. Hence also the still greater mystery of the actual union of the three series in the threefold incarnation which constitutes human personality.

But it is just this union which ought to warn us that the apparent separateness of these three fundamental concepts is not well founded in fact, and that further progress in research and a deeper insight might be able to clear up the mystery. Physical science ought to provide the solvent for our idea of hard impenetrable inert matter, and in the sequel I shall inquire in how far there are already the materials for such a solvent. Again, biological science should dispel the vagueness of the concept of life, and replace it by a more definite meaningful concept, which will yet not depend on purely material or mechanical elements. At present the concept of life is so indefinite and vague that, although the kingdom of life is fully recognised-, its government is placed under the rule of physical force or Mechanism. Life is practically banished from its own domain, and its throne is occupied by a usurper, v Biology thus becomes a subject province of physical science--the kingdom of life, the free artistic plastic kingdom of the universe, is inappropriately placed under the dead hand of matter. Mind again, which is closest to us in experience,- becomes farthest from us in exact thought. The concepts in which we envisage it are so vague and nebulous, compared with the hard and rigid contours of our concepts of matter, that the two appear poles asunder. Here too a reformed concept of mind might bring it much closer to a reformed concept of matter.

A reform of the concept of matter is urgently required, and is indeed amply justified by the unprecedented recent advances in physical science, and especially in our knowledge of the constitution of matter. And a reform will, as I shall show in the third chapter, bring matter considerably nearer to the concept of life.

With regard again to the concept of life, what is most urgently required is that it should be rid of that haziness, indefiniteness, and vagueness which makes it practically worthless for all exact scientific purposes. Biological science has not in recent years made the same gigantic strides forward in the knowledge of fundamentals that physical science has taken, and yet for Biology too the sky has considerably cleared, and its right to an independent position with its own categories and principles has been completely vindicated. Besides, the greatest development in Biology during this century has taken place in the science of Genetics, and the trend there has been steadily away from the mechanical physical conceptions which dominated Biology more than a generation ago. The time here too may be ripe for a reconsideration of some of the fundamental concepts and standpoints. I may express the hope that the masters of this science will not concentrate all their attention on special researches, however promising the clues at present followed may be, but that they will find time for a reconsideration of the wider conceptions which is becoming urgently necessary. Unless Biology can succeed in clarifying and harmonising her fundamental conceptions there is risk of great confusion, and there will be a continual temptation to fall back Upon the quite definite mechanical ideas of physical science. If in the sequel I join in the discussion of the foundations of Biology, not as entitled of right to speak but more in the character of a friendly spectator urging the importance of a certain point of view, I hope my presumption in so doing may be forgiven me.

For welcome as any new and deeper knowledge would be on these high matters, the present situation calls even more urgently for fresh points of view. Matter, life, and mind are, so to speak, the original alphabet of knowledge, the original nuclei round which all experience, thought, and speculation have gathered. Their origin is purely empirical, their course has been shaped by tradition for thousands of years, and all sorts of discarded philosophies have gone towards the making of their popular meanings. In spite, therefore, of the great fundamental aspects of truth which they embody, the kernel of truth in them has become overlaid by deep deposits of imperfect and erroneous knowledge. Modern science and philosophy have repeatedly ventured on reforms, but the popular use of these terms tends to obliterate all fine distinctions. I do not believe that an abiding scientific or philosophic advance in this respect will be possible until a more exact nomenclature has been adopted. A particular suggestion towards such a reform I am going to advocate and develop in the sequel, but in the meantime I wish to emphasise how important it is, not merely to continue the acquisition of knowledge, but also to develop new view-points from which to envisage all our vast accumulated material of knowledge. The Copernican revolution was not so much a revolution in the acquisition of new knowledge, as in view-point and perspective in respect of existing knowledge. The most far-reaching revolutions in knowledge are often of this character. Evolution in the mind of Darwin was, like the Copernican revolution, a new viewpoint, from which vast masses of biological knowledge already existing fell into new alignments and became the illustrations of a great new Principle. And similarly Einstein's conception of General Relativity in the physical universe, whatever its final form may yet be, is a new viewpoint from which the whole universe and all its working mechanisms acquire a new perspective and meaning.

More knowledge is undoubtedly required, but its acquisition must go hand in hand with the exploration of new synoptic concepts and new points of view. It will not help merely to accumulate details of which, even in the special departments of the separate biological sciences, the masses are already becoming more than any individual mind can bear. New co-ordinations are required, new syntheses which will sum up and explain and illuminate the otherwise amorphous collections of material. While research is being prosecuted as never before, while in biological science great, and in the physical sciences unprecedented, progress is being recorded, the call becomes ever more urgent for a reconsideration of fundamental concepts and the discovery of new view-points which might lead to the formulation of more general principles and wider generalisations. Nowhere are new viewpoints more urgently called for than in respect of the fundamental concepts of matter, life, and mind, of which the reform is overdue and the present state is rapidly becoming a real obstacle to further progress. And I may point out that the formulation of new view-points will depend not so much on masses of minute details, as on the reconsideration of the general principles in the light of recent advances, the collation and comparison of large collections of fact, and the survey of fairly large areas of knowledge. The road is to be discovered, not so much by minute local inspection as by wide roaming and exploration and surveying over large districts. Both methods are needed, and the question narrows itself down to one of comparative values. Just as happened in the cases of Newton and Einstein, so here too the new clues are more likely to be indicated by certain crucial dominant facts than by small increments of research. It would therefore be a great mistake to let the completion of present detailed researches take precedence over the more general and urgent questions to which I am drawing attention.

Let me in this connection mention one matter of crucial significance to which I think, sufficient importance has not yet been attached. To-day I think it is generally accepted that life has in the process of cosmic Evolution developed from or in the bosom of matter, and that mind itself has its inalienable physical basis. I do not think that among those who have given thought and attention to these matters there are to-day many who seriously question this position. Life is no dove that has flown to our shores from some world beyond this world; mind or soul is not an importation from some other universe. Life and mind are not mere visitants to this world, but not o/this world. There is nothing alien in them to the substance of the universe; they are with us and they are of us. The popular view still looks upon the association of life and mind with matter as a sort of symbiosis, as the close living together of three different beings, as the dwelling of life and the soul in the body of matter, just as in the organic world one plant or animal organism will be found normally living with and in another. This popular traditional view comes from the hoary beginnings of human thought and speculation, but it is definitely abandoned by all those who have assimilated the modern view-point of Evolution. For them in some way not yet fully understood, but accepted as an undoubted fact, both life and mind have developed from matter or the physical basis of existence. The acceptance of this fact must have far-reaching consequences for our world-view.

But before I refer to these consequences let me point out how this acceptance affects the grave issues over which our fathers fought a continuous battle royal during the latter half of the nineteenth century. The materialists contended for this very point, namely, that life and mind were born of matter. From this priority of matter they proceeded (quite illegitimately) to infer its primacy and self-sufficiency in the order of the universe, and to reduce life and mind.to a subsidiary and subordinate position as mere epiphenomena, as appearances on the surface of the one reality, matter. To use the Platonic figure, to them matter was the lyre, and the soul was the music of that lyre; the lyre was the substantive and abiding reality, and the music a mere passing product. And thus the priority and dominance of matter made of life and the soul merely transient and embarrassed phantoms on the stage of existence. This materialism was most hotly resented and contested by those who held to the spiritual values and realities. They denied not only the primacy of matter but also its priority or that life or mind sprang from it and were dependent on it in any real sense. In fact they denied the principle of Evolution as undermining all the spiritual and moral values of life. Both sides, materialists and spiritualists alike, were under the influence of the hard physical concepts of cause and effect which played such a great part in the science and philosophy of the nineteenth century. There could be nothing more in the effect than there was already in the cause; and if matter caused the soul, there could be nothing more in the soul than there already was in matter. The stream could not rise above its source. In other words, the soul was merely an apparent and no real substantial advance on matter. The general validity of this argument was never questioned and was thoroughly believed in by both sides. Hence those who affirmed the theory of Evolution logically tended to be materialists, and those who were spiritualists were logically forced to deny Evolution.

Without their knowing it the great battle raged, not over the interpretation of Evolution, but over a metaphysical theory of causation in which they both believed and were both wrong. Such is the irony of history. To-day we pick the poppies on the old battlefield of Evolution, and can afford to be fair to both sides. The essential terms have changed their meaning for us. We believe in Evolution, but it is no more the mechanical Evolution of a generation or two ago, but a creative Evolution. We believe in the growth which is really such and becomes ever more and more in the process. We believe in genesis which by its very nature is epigenesis. For us there is no such thing as static evolution, a becoming which does not become, but in its apparent permutations ever remains the same. The absolute equation of cause and effect, which was a dogma implicitly believed in by the men of that day, does not hold for us, as I shall in due course explain. The temperature has changed, the viewpoint has shifted, and to-day thoughtful men and women are sincere and convinced evolutionists, without troubling themselves over the dead and forgotten issue of materialism versus spiritualism. We accept the theory of descent, of life from matter, and of the mind from both. For educated men and women to-day Evolution is just as much part and parcel of their general outlook, of their intellectual atmosphere, so to say, as is the Copernican theory.

As I said before, this is a fact with very far-reaching consequences. If we believe that life and mind come from matter, if they are evolved from matter, if matter holds the promise, the potencies of life and mind, it can for us no longer be the old matter of the materialists or the physicists. The acceptance of the view for which the materialists fought so hard means in effect a complete transformation of the simple situation which they envisaged. Matter discloses a great secret; in the act of giving birth to life or mind it shows itself in an entirely unsuspected character, and it can never be the old matter again. The matter which holds the secret of life and mind is no longer the old matter which was merely the vehicle of motion and energy. The landmarks of the old order are shifting, the straight contours of the old ideas are curving, the whole situation which we are contemplating in the relations of matter, life and mind is becoming fluid instead of remaining rigid. The point to grasp and hold on to firmly is that the full and complete acceptance of Evolution must produce a great change in the significance of the fundamental concepts for us. Life and mind now, instead of being extraneous elements in the physical universe, become identified with the physical order, and they are all recognised as very much of a piece. This being so, it obviously becomes impossible thereupon to proceed to erect an all-embracing physical order in which life and mind are once more declared aliens. This cat and mouse procedure is simply a case of logical confusion. This in-and-out game will not do. If Evolution is accepted, and life and mind are developments in and from the physical order, they are in that order, and it becomes impossible to continue to envisage the physical order as purely mechanical, as one in which they have no part or lot, in which they are no real factors, and from which they should be logically excluded. If Evolution is right, if life and mind have arisen in and from matter, then the universe ceases to be a purely physical mechanism, and the system which results must provide a real place for `the factors of life and mind. To my mind there is no escape from that argument, and its implications must have a very far-reaching effect on our ideas of the physical order, and on a biology in which mechanical views are still dominant.

The point I have been trying to make is that our ultimate concepts need reconsideration, and that above all new view-points are necessary from which to re-survey the vast masses of physical and biological knowledge which have already accumulated. I have said that certain large dominant facts may be sufficient to lead to a new orientation of our ideas. And I have taken the accepted fact of Evolution as a case in point. The older materialists and the present day mechanical biologists have both fought hard for the acceptance of Evolution as a fact, without realising that such an acceptance must inevitably mean a transformation of their view-points, and that both the meaning of the concept of matter and the idea of the part played by mechanism in biology must be seriously affected by such acceptance. It is clear that the full significance of the great dominant idea of Evolution and its effect on the ordering of our ultimate world-view are not yet fully realised, and that we are in effect endeavouring simultaneously to go forward with two inconsistent sets of ideas, that is to say, with the idea of Evolution (not yet adequately realised) and the pre-Evolution physical ideas (not yet quite abandoned). This is, however, sheer confusion, and a clarification of our ideas and the realisation of new view-points have become necessary.

The science of the nineteenth century was, like its philosophy, its morals, and its civilisation in general, distinguished by a certain hardness, primness and precise limitation and, demarcation of ideas. Vagueness, indefinite and blurred outlines, anything savouring of mysticism, was abhorrent to that great age of limited exactitude. The rigid categories of physics were applied to the indefinite and hazy phenomena of life and mind. Concepts were in logic as well as in science narrowed down to their most luminous points, and the rest of their contents treated as non-existent. Situations were not envisaged as a whole of clear and vague obscure elements alike, but were analysed merely into their clear, outstanding, luminous points. A " cause," for instance, was not taken as a whole situation which at a certain stage insensibly passes into another situation, called the effect. No, the most outstanding feature in the first situation was isolated and abstracted and treated as the cause of the most outstanding and striking feature of the next situation, which was called the effect. Everything between this cause and this effect was blotted out, and the two sharp ideas or rather situations of cause and effect were made to confront each other in every case of causation like two opposing forces. This logical precision immediately had the effect of making it impossible to understand how the one passed into the other in actual causation. The efficient activity, which had of old been construed on the analogy of our voluntary muscular activity, was therefore resorted to in order to supply the explanation. As the voluntary muscular movement produces external action, so material cause was supposed to produce a material effect. Even then the mind found it difficult to realise the passage from the one to the other. Every causation seemed to imply some action at a distance, unless cause and effect were in absolute contact. But we know that there is no such thing as absolute contact even in the elements of the most closely packed situation. Hence causation of this rigid type really became unintelligible. Not even the old fiction of an ether which embraced all material things, and as a vehicle made transmission of influence from one to the other possible seemed able to overcome the contradictions into which thought had landed itself through its hard and narrow concepts of cause and effect. And in fact there is no way out of the impasse but by retracing our steps and recognising that these concepts are partial and misleading abstractions. We have to return to the fluidity and plasticity of nature and experience in order to find the concepts of reality. When we do this we find that round every luminous point in experience there is a penumbra, a gradual shading off into haziness and obscurity. A " concept " is not merely its clear luminous centre, but embraces a surrounding sphere of meaning or influence of smaller or larger dimensions, in which the luminosity tails off and grows fainter until it disappears. Similarly a " thing " is not merely that which presents itself as such in clearest definite outline, but this central area is surrounded by a zone of vague sense-data and influences which shades off into the region of the indefinite. The hard and abrupt contours of our ordinary conceptual system do not apply to reality and make reality inexplicable, not only in the case of causation, but in all cases of relations between things, qualities, and ideas. Conceive of a cause as a centre with a zone of activity or influence surrounding it and shading gradually off into indefiniteness. Next conceive of an effect as similarly surrounded. It is easy in that way to understand their interaction, and to see that cause and effect are not at arm's length but interlocked, and embrace and influence each other through the interpenetration of their two fields. In fact the conception of Fields of force which has become customary in Electro-Magnetism is only a special case of a phenomenon which is quite universal in the realms of thought and reality alike. Every " thing " has its field, like itself, only more attenuated; every concept has likewise its field. It is in these fields and these fields only that things really happen. It is the intermingling of fields which is creative or causal in nature as well as in life. The hard secluded thing or concept is barren because abstract, and but for its field it could never come into real contact or into active or creative relations with any other thing or concept. Things, ideas, animals, plants, persons: all these, like physical forces, have their fields, and but for their fields they would be unintelligible, their activities would be impossible, and their relations barren and sterile. The abstract intelligence, in isolating things or ideas, and constituting them apart from their fields, and treating the latter as non-existent, has made the real concrete world of matter and of life quite unintelligible and inexplicable. The world is thus in abstraction constituted of entities which are absolutely discontinuous, with nothing between them to bridge the impassable gulfs, little or great, which separate them from each other. The world becomes to us a mere collection of disjecta membra, drained of all union or mutual relations, dead, barren, inactive, unintelligible. And in order once more to bring active relations into this scrap-heap of disconnected entities, the mind has to conjure up spirits, influences, forces and what not from the vasty deep of its own imagination. And all this is due to the initial mistake of enclosing things or ideas or persons in hard contours which are purely artificial and are not in accordance with the natural shading-off continuities which are or should be well known to science and philosophy alike. One of the most salutary reforms in thought which could be effected would be for people to accustom themselves to the idea of fields, and to look upon every concrete thing or person or even idea as merely a centre, surrounded by zones or aurae or penumbrae of the same nature as the centre, only more attenuated and shading off into indefiniteness. The concept of "fields" will be developed in subsequent chapters

There is one more remark I wish to make in regard to the activity of the abstract intelligence in construing our actual experience. The analytical character of thought has a far-reaching effect in obscuring the nature of reality, which has to be carefully guarded against. In order to understand and explore any concrete situation, we analyse it into its factors or elements, whose separate operation and effects are then studied, in isolation so td say. This procedure is not only quite legitimate, but the only one possible, if we wish to understand and investigate the complex groupings of nature. It is the analytical method which science has applied with such outstanding success; and but for this analysis of a complex phenomenon or situation into its separate elements and the study of these in isolation, it is fair to assume that very little progress would have been possible in the understanding of Nature with all her obscure processes. When the isolated elements or factors of the complex situation have been separately studied, they are recombined in order to reconstitute the original situation. Two sources of error here become possible. In the first place, in the original analysis something may have escaped, so that in the reconstruction we have no longer all the original elements present, but something less. I have already shown how " fields " escape in our view of things and even in concepts. The same happens in regard to the elements into which a situation is analysed. And it is certain that in every case of analysis and reconstitution of a concrete situation something escapes which makes the artificial situation as reconstructed different from the original situation which was to be explored and explained. An element of more or less error has entered. This may be called the error of analysis.

In the second place, we are apt after the analysis and investigation of the isolated elements or factors to look upon them as the natural factors of the situation, and upon the situation itself as a sort of result brought about by them. The abstract analytical elements thus become the real operative entities, while the concrete situation or phenomenon to be explained becomes their product or resultant. As a matter of fact, just the opposite is the case. We start in nature with the complex situation or sensible phenomenon as the reality to be explained. The analytical elements or factors are merely the result of analysis, and might even be merely abstractions. But because they are simpler and admit of closer scrutiny and experiment, we have come to look upon them as real or constitutive, and upon the situation from which they were abstracted or analysed, as artificial or constituted. Thus it has come about that in physical science, for instance, the elements of matter or force into which bodies have been analysed -have tended to become the reals. Thus scientific entities like electrons and protons, and the physical energies or forces which they represent, are taken to be the real entities in nature, and sensible matter or bodies as something derivative and merely resulting from their activities. The abstract thus becomes the real, the concrete is relegated to a secondary position. This inversion of reality is very much the same procedure as was followed by the scholastic and other philosophers who attributed reality to universals instead of to concrete particulars. This may be called the error of abstraction or generalisation. Against both these forms of error we have to guard, if we wish faithfully to interpret Nature as we experience her.

Analysis, abstraction and generalisation are indeed necessary as instruments of scientific understanding, but they also necessarily involve a departure from the complex concrete, and thus produce a possible element of error which in its ultimate effects may produce a serious distortion in our general view of reality. The concrete whole of a situation comes to be deduced from its abstract parts, and the principle of natural explanation thus proceeds by way of the parts to the whole. The whole as so understood is confined to its parts and comes to suffer from the same limitations as its parts. For the full concrete reality comes to be substituted a more limited scheme or pattern of parts, an aggregation rather than a natural organic synthesis.

Our object in studying and interpreting Nature is to be faithful to our experience of her. We do not want to recreate Nature in our own image or abstract thought scheme, and as far as possible we wish to eliminate errors of observation or construction which are due to us as observers. We do not wish to spread Nature on a sort of Procrustes bed of our concepts and cut off here and there what appears surplus or unnecessary or even non-existent to our subjective standards. Our experience is largely fluid and plastic, with little that is rigid and with much that is indefinite about it. We should as far as possible withstand the temptation to pour this plastic experience into the moulds of our hard and narrow preconceived notions, and even at the risk of failing to explain precisely all that we experience we should be modest and loyal in the handling of that experience. In that way a good deal of what we have hitherto felt certain may once more become uncertain; the solid and recognised landmarks may once more become blurred or shifting; the stable results of nineteenth-century science may once more become unstable and uncertain. But the way will be open for the truer constructions of the future, and the foundations of our future science will be more deeply and securely laid.

In the following chapters a modest effort will be made to apply the above ideas and principles to a new interpretation of Nature, including, as it does, Matter, Life, Mind, and Personality. Matter, Life, and Mind, so far from being discontinuous and disparate, will appear as a more or less connected progressive series of the same great Process. And this Process will be shown to underlie and account for the characters of all three, and to give to Evolution, both inorganic and organic, both psychical and spiritual, a fundamental unity and continuity which it does not seem to possess according to current scientific and philosophical ideas. 1

1 It is interesting to note how Professor A. N. Whitehead in his Science and the Modern World deals with the situation which I have tried to meet by means of the concept of " fields." He also takes the view that the thing or event taken by itself in its spatial limits is a false simplification, which he calls the fallacy of Misplaced Concreteness. According to him, the mistake is due to the assumption of the simple location of things or events, in other words, to the mistaken belief that a thing or event, as it appears in a definite space at a certain time, is all there is of it, and that it has nothing to do with other spaces or other times. This mistake of simple location is therefore identical with that pointed out above of confining a thing or event to its apparent spatial contours or boundaries, with nothing of it beyond them. I--following the lead of physical science-- attempt to remedy the mistake by extending the thing or event into its " field " beyond these contours or boundaries. Professor Whitehead proceeds in a more radical way by a re-examination of the status of Space-Time in relation to things and events. In this way he arrives at the result that a thing or event is not confined to its own simple Space--Time location, and is thus not itself alone, but that it reflects the aspects of all other things and events from its particular standpoint, and thus in a sense involves their locations also. In the larger context of nature the thing or event is, therefore, a synthesis of itself with the aspects or perspectives of everything else as mirrored from its standpoint. Whitehead's searching analysis leads to results which closely resemble those of Leibniz's Monadology, and involve a radical transformation of current practical and scientific concepts. The alternative concept of "fields," while less revolutionary and simpler to understand, seems to meet the purpose in view sufficiently well. On both views a thing or event transcends its apparent limits. That the popular view of " simple location " involves a most insidious and far-reaching error of abstraction is common ground to both Professor Whitehead and myself.
