---
title: "Some Holistic Functions and Categories"
chapter: 6
---

Summary: Avoiding as far as possible philosophical categories and confining ourselves to scientific view-points, we shall now try to consider more closely the concept of the whole and the results flowing from it. We have already seen that the concept of the whole means not &general tendency but a type of structure, a schema or framework, which, however, can only be filled with concrete details by actual experience. A whole is then a synthesis or structure of parts in which the synthesis becomes ever closer so as materially to affect the character of the functions or activities which become correspondingly more unified (or holistic). It is, however, important to realise that the whole is not some tertium quid over and above the parts which compose it; it is the parts in their intimate union, and the new reactions which result from that union. But in that union the parts themselves are more or less affected and altered towards the type represented by the union, so that the whole is evidenced in a change of parts as well as a change of resulting functions.

The whole thus appears as a, marked power of regulation and co-ordination in respect of both the structure and the functioning of the parts. This is probably the' most striking feature of organisms---that they involve a balanced correlation of organs and functions. All the various activities of the several parts and organs seem directed to central ends; there is thus co-operation and unified action of the organism as a whole instead of the separate mechanical activities of the parts. The whole thus becomes synonymous with unified (or holistic) action.

This intense synthesis and unification in the action of a whole involve a corresponding transformation of concepts and categories. Thus while in a mechanical aggregate each part acts as a separate cause, and the resultant activity is a sum of the component activities, in organic activity or the activity of the whole this separate action or causation disappears in a real synthesis or, unity which makes the components unrecognisable in the unified result. Yet even here we must realise that the whole does not act as a separate cause, distinct from its parts, no more than it is itself something additional over and above its parts. Holism is of the parts and acts through the parts, but the parts in their new relation of intimate synthesis which gives them their unified action.

The whole, therefore, completely transforms the concept of Causality. When an external cause acts on a whole, the resultant effect is not merely traceable to the cause, but has become transformed in the process. The whole seems to absorb and metabolise the external stimulus and to assimilate it into its own activity; and the resultant response is no longer the passive effect of the stimulus or cause, but appears as the activity of the whole. This holistic transformation of causality takes place in all organic stimuli and responses. The cause or stimulus applied does not issue in its own passive effect, but in an active response which seems more clearly traceable to the organism or whole itself. In fact the physical category of " cause " undergoes a far-reaching change in its application to organisms or wholes generally. The whole appears as the real cause of the response, and not the external stimulus, which seems to play the quite minor role of a mere excitant or condition.

The most important result of the idea of the whole is, however, the appearance of the concept of Creativeness. It is the synthesis involved in the concept of the whole which is the source of creativeness in Nature. Nature is creative, Evolution is creative, just in proportion as it consists of wholes which bring about new structural groupings and syntheses. The whole evolves these new structural groupings out of the old materials; and thus arises the " creativeness " of Evolution, as well as the novelty and initiative which we see in organic Nature. The concept of creativeness which flows from that of the whole has the most far-reaching effects in its application to Nature. Once we grasp firmly the fact that Nature and Evolution are really creative, we are out of the bonds of the old crude mechanical ideas, and we enter an altogether new zone of ideas and categories. But the important point for our purpose is that " creativeness " is simply a deduction from the concept of the whole and is characteristic of the order of wholes in the universe. It is wholes and wholes only that are creative. The formula omne vivum e vivo could therefore be generalised and applied to wholes generally. This creativeness issues not only in the origin of new organic species, but also in the great Values which are the creations of the whole on the spiritual level.

From this it is clear how also the concept of Freedom is rooted in that of the whole, organic or other. For the external causation is absorbed and transformed by the subtle metabolism of the whole into something of itself; otherness becomes selfness; the pressure of the external is transformed into the action of itself. Necessity or external determination is transformed into self-determination or Freedom. And as the series of wholes progresses the element of Freedom increases in the world, until finally at the human stage Freedom takes conscious control of the process and begins to create the free ethical world of the spirit. Holism thus becomes basic to organic progress and free creative advance, to the Values and Ideals which ultimately give life all of worth it has, and to the Freedom which is the condition of all spiritual as well as organic progress.

But Holism is seen not only in the advance, in the changes and variations for ever going forward. It is seen just as much in the stability of the great Types. The new always arrives in the bosom of the pre-existing structure, and at its prompting and largely in harmony with it. Its novelty is small compared to its essential conservatism. Variation is infinitesimal compared to Heredity. It is this fundamental unity or unitariness and wholeness in organisms and organic Evolution generally which seems to explain their essential stability as well as the regulation and co-ordination of the whole process--its conservative self-control, if one may use a metaphor.

Individuality and purposiveness, as holistic categories, are referred to more especially in Chapter IX. The chapter concludes with a summary of the functions which the term Holism covers in the shaping of Evolution.

IN the last chapter the ideas of the whole and Holism were sketched in a general and preliminary way. Before we proceed to test the working value of the new ideas it will be necessary to explore somewhat more deeply into them. It is the vagueness of the concept of Life which makes ib unsatisfactory for scientific purposes, and we should make certain that the concept of the whole, which is intended to make it definite for scientific purposes, be made as clear as possible.

Let me here say a word about the method we are pursuing. Hitherto we have followed as closely as possible the results of science; we have studied the fundamental structures of physical and biological science in the atom and the cell, and endeavoured to frame a concept of the whole on the basis of those structures. I propose to continue to pursue this course, and to explore and build up the concept of the whole from the results of the analysis of Nature. We shall try to understand what is involved and implied in the processes of the small centres of unity in Nature, and derive as much aid and illumination from them as possible; in that way we shall try to proceed as a matter of method from the apparently simple to the complex. We are trying to build up a natural concept of the whole, and for that as well as other reasons we are avoiding a recourse to philosophical considerations. The temptation is very strong for investigators when ' they approach the domains of life and mind, so different apparently from that of physical science, to abandon the scientific categories of research for philosophical categories, and to seek for an explanation of the phenomena of life in concepts which sound strange and alien to science. No wonder that most biologists, frightened by this procedure and by this appeal to ideas and methods of which they are traditionally suspicious, react in the opposite direction, and seek refuge in purely mechanical ideas and explanations of the phenomena of life. At first sight the concept of the whole may appear to wear a metaphysical garb; but whatever its occasional use in other connections, the intention here is to eschew metaphysics and to hammer out a concept which will supply a real and deeply felt want in the explanation of organic processes, and which will at the same time give expression to the natural affiliations of the phenomena of life with those of matter on the one hand and of mind on the other. We shall follow the scientific clues as far as is in any way possible in the carrying out of this intention. Above all it is necessary to make the concept of the whole as simple, clear and definite as possible.

I wish to guard against the impression that philosophy has no contribution to make to the consideration of the whole and Holism generally. On the contrary, here as elsewhere the last word will probably be with philosophy. There is a Metaphysic or Logic of Holism still to be written, which will lay bare the ultimate ideas involved and their relations and validity. That task is not attempted here. Avoiding the metaphysical implications, I am in this book merely endeavouring to elucidate as clearly and simply as possible the idea of the whole with its most obvious general consequences, and to state the broad effect which its clear realisation must have on our methods of thought and research.

Let me repeat what was said in the last chapter; the whole is riot a general principle or tendency; it is a structure or schema. A natural body or organism can be analysed into two factors; the form, structure or schema, and the concrete characters or qualities which fill up that form or structure. For these concrete characters or qualities we have in every case to rely on experience; the colour, feel or smell of a thing or the characters of an animal can only be learnt from observation or experience in any particular case. But the form or structure involves features which can be most conveniently generalised into concepts, and if these concepts are clear and definite, results can again be deduced from them which make them most useful as counters of thought and explanation. The generalised concepts of space and time as developed, not so much by the philosophers as by the mathematicians, have these qualities of clearness and definiteness which make them specially fruitful for investigating the structure of the physical world, as we have seen in the discussion of the Theory of Relativity. And similariy the concept of the whole, if clearly apprehended and firmly held, may become a powerful means of exploring the intricate phenomena of life and mind. The concept of the whole is a generalised structure or schema, a framework to be filled in in any particular case; and it is this structural or schematic character which brings it close to that concrete character which distinguishes all natural objects in the world of experience. For the sake of clearness let us proceed to analyse the fundamental characters of a whole as we see it exemplified in, say, a simple organism.

A whole is a synthesis or unity of parts, so close that it affects the activities and interactions of those parts, impresses on them a special character, and makes them different from what they would have been in a combination devoid of such unity or synthesis. That is the fundamental element in the concept of the whole. It is a complex of parts, but so close and intimate, so unified, that the characters and relations and activities of the parts are affected and changed by the synthesis. The analogy of a physical mixture and a chemical compound is very useful and instructive in this connection, and we have already seen that in a real though limited sense a chemical compound is a whole. A whole is not some tertium quid over and above the parts which compose it; it is these parts in their intimate union and the new reactions and functions Which result from that union. It is a new structure of those parts, with the altered activities and functions which flow from this structure. The parts are not lost or destroyed in the new structure into which they enter; the atoms or molecules persist in the new compound, just as the cells persist in the organism. But their independent functions and activities are, just as themselves, grouped, related, correlated and unified in the structural whole. A new bent is impressed on these functions. They follow a new modus operandi in the new pattern of the whole. To the structural unity of the parts in the whole corresponds an equally and perhaps even more significant functional unity or correlation of activities. Just as in dynamics a body subject to pulls in various directions moves with one resultant velocity in one definite direction, so the functions and the activities of the parts in the whole are all co-ordinated and unified into one complex character which belongs or appears to belong to the whole as such. With this difference, again (just as in the difference between a physical mixture and a chemical compound), that the resultant function is not a mere addition and composition of the unaltered composing functional elements, but the change involves both these elements and their final result. Thus taking x to represent a mixture and x1 to represent a whole, we cannot say that a + b + c + d = x (mixture) in the one case and x1 = (whole) in the other; but in the synthesis which results in x1 the functions of the parts themselves are changed into alf bv cp dv so that corresponding to the formula of mixture a + b + c + d = x we have the holistic formula a1 + b1 + c1 + d1 = x1. It is most important to realise this point; both the individual functions of the parts '(cells, organs, etc.) and their composition or correlation in the complex are affected and altered by the synthesis which is the whole. Not only does the synthesis of the parts influence and indeed constitute the whole; the whole in its turn impresses its character on each individual part, which feels its influence in the most real and intimate manner. The whole-ward tendency and activity of the parts are most deeply characteristic of the nature of the whole. This, then, is the primary and most important element in the concept of the whole: the synthetic unity of structure and its functions which affects the parts and their functions or activities without their loss or destruction. The unity, although so close and intimate and so deeply affecting the parts and their functions, is not such as to merge the parts completely, but to leave them a latitude which varies with individual wholes at the same state of development, and still more at different stages of development.

From this fundamental unification of the parts which constitute the whole, and the intimate reciprocal influence which parts and whole exert on each other, follow certain results of great importance for our general concept of the whole.

In the first place, unity of action, which is characteristic of the whole, shows itself in the marked power of regulation and correlation which the whole appears to possess in respect of its parts. This is perhaps the most striking feature of organic wholes; however complex they are, a certain balanced correlation of functions is maintained. If there is any disturbance among the parts which upsets the routine of the whole, then either this disturbance is eliminated by the co-operative effort of many or all the parts, or the functions of the other parts are so readjusted that a new balance and routine is established. The synthetic unity of the whole produces synthetic or holistic action throughout the whole; the activities and functions of the parts also become holistic, so that in addition to their ordinary routine they have a whole-ward aspect or tendency which becomes active whenever the balance of the whole is disturbed. It is this holistic character distinguishing the activity and functions not only of the whole but also of its parts which underlies the remarkable phenomena of co-operation among cells to which attention was drawn in the fourth chapter. The co-operation is not so much the interaction of independent units as in truth and really the pressure of the whole on the parts. Indeed the entire function or system of the organism is holistic; the synthetic unity of the whole is so deeply stamped on the parts and reflected in the activities of the parts, that they all appear to " play up " to each other, and to co-operate in maintaining or, in case of disturbance, restoring the balance of equilibrium of activities which is characteristic of the particular whole. From the synthetic unity of the whole follows the holistic action of all its parts, as well as the characteristic power of correlating and regulating which the whole seems to exert in respect of the parts. All these properties really flow from the idea and nature of the whole; once this idea is clearly realised, the true principle of organic explanation is found, and the application of the ideas and methods of mechanism or vitalism becomes superfluous, as we shall see later.

In order to assist us in rendering clear our ideas of the whole and holistic action, as distinguished from those of a mechanical aggregate and mechanical action, let us consider a material system in dynamic equilibrium, which has many analogies to the ideas we are exploring. The character of such a system is that within certain limits it will maintain its equilibrium against disturbance and interference. If, it meets with any disturbance, such as an external impact or any interference with its internal movements, its equilibrium will for a moment be disturbed; but immediately readjustments will take place, the effects of the disturbance will become distributed throughout the system, new positions of the parts and new movements of these parts will result, with the effect that a fresh equilibrium is established, and the system, with a somewhat altered arrangement of parts and movements, will once more be in dynamic equilibrium. When we pass from this physical system to an organic whole a transformation of ideas takes place: the system becomes a synthesis qualitatively different from the system, a synthesis so intense that a new unity arises and a different order of ideas becomes necessary for its explanation. To the mechanical readjustment of the parts correspond the regulation and correlation which the organic whole exercises in respect of its parts; with this difference, again, that, while the new mechanical equilibrium is the exact mathematical resultant of the component forces, in the organic whole, parts and whole reciprocally influence and alter each other instead of merely the parts making up the whole, and in the end it is practically impossible to say where the whole ends and the parts begin, so intimate is their interaction and so profound their mutual influence. In fact so intense is the union that the differentiation into parts and whole becomes in practice impossible, and the whole seems to be in each part, just as the parts are in the whole. There is an intensification of synthesis or unity, as we rise from the mechanical composition to the chemical compound, and from this again to the organic whole; an intensification which is already qualitatively different as between the first two, but which becomes entirely sui generis in the last. To mistake the unity of the whole for the mere mechanical system of dynamics, and the holistic action which shows itself in organic regulation, correlation and co-operative interaction for the readjustment of forces and self-maintenance of equilibrium in the dynamic system, is to confound two quite different orders pf ideas and facts. The whole differs essentially from the mechanical system; holistic action or function differs even more essentially from the " action " or " reaction " of dynamics, and from the meaning of those terms as used in Newton's Laws of Motion and still current in the physical science of to-day.

Watch the activities of an animal. See how innumerable movements are blended in one definite action. The unity and specificity of the action are not reducible to mechanical' terms; it is not the dynamical equivalent of its components, it follows a quite different pattern or plan. Its unity is indeed unique and only explicable by resort to new categories. In other words, organic action is holistic and not merely mechanical.

In other directions too the nature of the whole brings about this intensive transformation of concepts. Let us take the idea of cause and see how it is affected by the concept of the whole. The causal idea is quite an interesting test to apply to the whole, and it will help to elucidate the point we are dealing with, as well as some other points that concern the nature of the whole. The question, for instance, whether the whole is something different from and additional to its parts is paralleled by the question whether the whole acts as a cause as distinct from its parts; in other words, is the causality of the whole exhausted by the causal operation of its parts, or is there something over and above the influence of the parts which must be attributed to the whole as such? I have already explained that the whole is nothing but the specific synthesis of the parts and not something additional to them. Similarly the causality of the whole is not an additional factor, but simply the causality of the parts in their intimate synthesis in the whole. In mechanical composites each element in operation or action has its own effect and is a separate cause; and the final result is the resultant blending of all these separate effects. In the whole, as we have seen, there is not this individual separate action of the parts; there is a synthesis which makes the elements or parts act as one or holistically; and the action or function is an inseparable holistic unity just in proportion as the synthesis is a whole or realises the character of wholeness. It is in this sense, and in this sense only, that the whole is a cause; it is a cause not apart from its parts, but solely through their synthesis in action. The whole fuses the action its elements into a real synthesis, into a unity which makes the result quite different from what it would have been as the separate activities of the parts. The structural synthesis of the whole results in a similar synthesis of activity or function. Just as the whole as a structural unity, and only as such, is 'something different, something new compared with its parts in their separateness or isolation, so too its action is radically different from the blending of their separate actions.

Thus the causality of the whole is explained, and from this explanation one can appreciate how immensely complicated the action or functioning of an organism must be. When a stimulus is applied to an organism a whole is set in motion, and the response which results is not merely an affair of the original stimulus, but of the entire whole in all its unique complication of parts and functions which has been set in motion. The comparatively simple, isolable phenomenon of causation as observed in the interaction of material bodies undergoes a complete -and radical transformation when observed in the case of an organism; and the difference is not a mystery, but is deducible from the nature of the whole as exemplified by an organism. I shall return to this matter immediately, and pass on to another important result of the nature of a whole.

In the preceding chapters I have more than once used the word " creative “; I have called the whole " creative "; I have called Evolution " creative "; I have even applied the term to matter in its structural characterisation. It is important to see in what sense wholes, or Evolution generally, or even matter is called " creative “ and the foregoing discussion will have prepared us for the explanation which follows. There is a sense in which the word. " creation “ falls outside the scope of an intelligible science or philosophy. I refer to absolute creation--creation, that is to say, out of nothing. Absolute creation just as absolute annihilation cannot be comprehended by the human mind. E nihilo nihil fit is a fundamental principle of thought as well as of Nature.

But there is another form of creation which is not only intelligible but follows directly from the explanation of holistic action which I have already given. Holistic action is creative, and is the only form of creation or creativeness which is intelligible to us. Here again the distinction between mere physical mixtures and chemical compounds illustrates the difference between what is and what is not creative. A mere mechanical aggregate is nothing new, and is no more than the sum of the mixed ingredients, while the chemical compound is new in the sense that out of the constituent materials another qualitatively different substance has been made. A new structure has been formed in the chemical compound. In the same way a new structure and substance is made in the atom out of the qualitatively different electrons and protons. It was on this account and in this sense that we called matter creative; creative, that is to say, of structures and substances different from their constituent elements or parts.

It is, however, when we come to consider organisms that we see the whole creative in a full "and proper sense. In thought we distinguish between the deductive and the inductive--between the deduction of the particular from the general, the drawing out, unfolding, or explicating what is given, and the reverse inductive process, the integration or synthesis of the given parts or elements into a new, more complex content. The action of organisms proceeds on the analogy of induction. We have seen how the characteristic feature of organic process is metabolism, the transformation of the given materials into something different, of the inorganic into the organic, of the organic material of one kind into that of another kind. Creative synthesis is characteristic of all organic actions and functions.

But it is not in metabolism only that this creative transformation is exemplified; perhaps the phenomena of growth and development afford even more characteristic and significant examples of the creative synthesis which is the clearest expression of the nature of Holism. Creation is stamped on the face of organic nature; the differences which separate individuals into species, genera, orders and so forth are real differences which were either originally created in one great creative Act at the beginning, or were creatively evolved in the gradual process of organic descent, so that the Process is creative. Everywhere we meet the new, which is irreducible to the old elements from which it seems, to have sprung; the qualities and characters on which new stable varieties or species are founded cannot be explained on the basis of known pre-existing qualities or characters. And even where it is possible to recognise certain of the old elements in the new, the new is something different and contains something more than the old elements. We may say that the creative synthesis consists in the making of a new arrangement of old elements, that the old elements have been fixed in a new structure which has different qualities from the old pre-existing structure; in this case it would only be the synthesis which is really new. But to my mind if we take big stretches of organic descent and compare the main great Types which distinguish the Vegetable and Animal kingdoms, we must inevitably come to the conclusion that there is more than this in the creative process of evolution. Compare a protozoon with a vertebrate animal, or one of the higher animals with man, and it surely becomes foolish to say that the elementary units are the same in both cases, and only their arrangement or synthesis into structures is different. Mere rearrangement of supposed unalterable pre-existing elements, mere reshufflings of the old cards, will give us a sort of chemistry of Evolution, but not the vast range of real effective advance which we know. The process of creative Evolution is not a mechanical rearrangement of old material; it involves the qualitatively new at every stage, from the most minute elements to the most complex structure. It is not merely the structure which is new and different from what has gone before, some of the materials are also new; the details of the new structure also involve new smaller structures along with the old inherited structures; and in the final analysis (if that were possible) we would find among the elementary units also new ones in addition to the old ones carried forward in the process of descent. There is the creation of the new variety or species (the new structure); there is the creation of new unit characters (parts of the structure) which justify the new species or variety; and there is behind the new unit characters not mere re-arrangements of elements of old character units, but an integration of new materials or quality elements with the old elements in the formation of the new unit characters. The process is creative of the new at every step and at every stage, and in the smallest quality elements no less than in the large or total structures. Starting from imaginary elements a, b, c, d, we find in organic advance in no case a mere structural regrouping of these elements only, but everywhere an element of qualitative newness, x, incorporated along with the old elements into the new structure. In every advance we would find not merely a new structure but also an x in one form or another. I have used the concept of units or elements for the purpose of illustration; but really the creative process of Evolution is holistic, and in the last resort unanalysable into definite units; the blending of inherited with new structures and characters is so close that no dissociation is possible, and it is impossible to say where the old elements end and the new begin. But beyond any manner of doubt in the advance the new is there along with the old in such a way that we can only understand the process, both in its entirety and in its minutest detail, as a real creative one.

It may be argued that my view of organic creativeness as meaning, not merely new grouping or structures but also new character units and quality elements, brings us back to that conception of absolute creation which I have-already declared to be incomprehensible. Is it not better then, it may be asked, to fall back on the idea of potentiality rather than creativeness, and to conceive the organic advance as the rendering actual what was implicit and potential in the organism in the beginning? In this way new characters which emerge in the course of organic descent would not be taken as absolutely new, but as the appearance or emergence of potential characters which were there all along in the ancestors of the new organism. My answer would be that the concept of potentiality is quite useful but not applicable, here; the expression of the implicit new is usually a very long process which may occupy an indefinite number of generations before its actual emergence in a new sensible character or species. During this process of subsensible growth or incubation the character may be fairly described as potential in the ancestors of the new species. But to go further back and to say that the new is there in potential form from the very beginning is to fall back into the preformation view of Evolution which we have already in the last chapter discarded as making a farce of all real organic advance. Potentiality presupposes that the real creative work is already done, and that the slow finishing touches of expression alone remain to be put on. We have simply to face the facts of Nature frankly as we find them; and to my mind there is no doubt, however hard it is to picture to ourselves the underlying idea of creation, that the emergence of the really new, in other words, the creativeness of the evolutionary process, is the only view which is in harmony with our scientific knowledge. Real creativeness is a fundamental characteristic of holistic structure and action. It necessarily means such integration of structures and activities as results in new characters not there before and which cannot be reduced to pre-existing elements. Holistic action, therefore, necessarily issues in real progress and creative Evolution.

There is no doubt that the concept of creativeness raises a fundamental issue in respect both of reality and knowledge. If there is this evolution or making not only of new wholes or structures, but also of new quality elements therein, the whole fabric of Mechanism as ordinarily understood is shaken to its foundations. The iron rule of the past is broken; the future is not a mere rehearsal of the past; in many cases the new effect is more than its pre-existing cause. The universe ceases to be a hide-bound, cast-iron, completely closed system from which real progress and freedom are excluded. It is open in one direction, the direction in which time is moving; the future faces an open gateway, and the universe is the highway of the creative movement, of that great march in which all the unit wholes and formations of Reality take their part and advance towards a fuller measure of wholeness. The freedom is limited, the movement is slow, the character of the universe is essentially conservative. But at any rate conservatism is not the last word to be said about it. It does not go like a clock, completely manufactured, and once for all wound up at the beginning to mark a time fixed and predetermined for it. It is slowly making itself, it is slowly winding itself up, it is slowly making its own time. It is a slow, tentative, perhaps in details a somewhat blundering process; but it is real and creative; the new successful effort is for ever issuing out of the old mistakes, and a slow advance is being laboriously recorded and continuously maintained. This figurative language, although perhaps somewhat highly coloured, is really no exaggeration. " Creativeness " is the key-word, and it is also the key position in the great battle which is now being fought out between the nineteenth-century and the twentieth-century conceptions of the nature and trend of the universe, between Mechanism as ordinarily understood and what is here called Holism. Those who wish to defend the old position of Mechanism (and they are still the great majority in the army of Science) will have to concentrate their forces at this point. If the concept of creativeness, of the emergent new in the Evolution of the universe, really wins through, Mechanism as a scientific and philosophical category will be reduced to very modest proportions. The creativeness of Evolution at all stages has indeed the' most profound effect on our views of Nature and her order and on all our methods of explaining her processes. To illustrate this let us revert once more to the oft-quoted difference between a mere physical mixture and a chemical compound. The mixture is, like the compound, a structure, much looser, of course, than the compound, but still a structure of sorts. But the compound differs from it in being a radically different structure, a new structure has emerged in the compound, a creative moment has entered into the process which was not there before. And the result is a complete difference in all the pertinent phenomena of the two. Even our very categories of description have to undergo a corresponding transformation. If we tried to describe the properties and actions of a chemical compound on the same principles as those of a mechanical mixture, we would go grievously wrong, and the real facts would be hopelessly distorted. The creative moment which has entered into the chemical compound in its passage from a mere physical mixture, the new structure which has resulted from the change, requires new concepts and principles of description. And this is freely admitted by chemists and physicists alike. The case for new categories of description becomes far stronger at the next creative advance, where chemical structure is transformed into organic structure. In both cases new wholes are produced, and in this sense and for this reason we may say that Holism is at work; in the organic structure the creative advance is admittedly far greater than in the chemical compound. The concentration and intensification of structure which we call the whole in the organism are comparatively far greater and higher than the similar phenomena in the chemical compound as compared to the mere mixture. Something indisputably new has been produced; there has been creation; a new structure has arisen which has its own categories of description; and to apply mere chemical and physical concepts of action and description to this new structure is to ignore the creative v advance which has taken place and to confound two entirely different, however closely related, structures and stages of Evolution. The physico-chemical view and explanation of organism therefore rest on a fundamental misconception and on a denial or disregard of the creative advance in natural Evolution.

There is the physical description of the mixture; there is the chemical description of the compound; and there is what I call the holistic description of the organism, which recognises the qualitative newness and sui generis nature of the structure which bears the characters of what we call life. The apparent materials may even be the same in all three cases; but the character and intensity of their union in each case varies in such a way that entirely different structures with entirely different characters result. There is a rising element of wholeness in all three structures, and the holistic character is by no means confined to the third or organic structure. But its wholeness is much more marked and pronounced than that of the other two; it is, in fact, the very type and exemplar of a whole; and a purely physico-chemical explanation of its nature and functions cannot possibly do justice to this unique holistic character. This is but another way of affirming the creative character of the advance from the mere physical mixture to The chemical structure, and still more in the advance from the chemical to the organic structure in Nature. The creative advance is the fact, to which our conceptual theories of explanation have to conform. The creativeness consists in the progressive advance in respect of the character of wholeness which distinguishes the three stages of structure; and the advance is in a geometrical rather than an arithmetical progression, that is to say, the ratio of wholeness increases with the advance. The physical and chemical categories still apply, but they are not sufficient, and have to be supplemented by the holistic categories which correspond to and express the greater and qualitatively more intense wholeness which characterises the organism as distinguished from the mixture or the compound.

Let me here point out that it is not all causation which is creative; much of the causation in the universe is purely mechanical and produces nothing new. Only wholes are creative; only the causality of wholes produces effects which are really new. Structure in fact and in Nature arises from pre-existing structures whether in the organic or inorganic domain. Omne vivum e vivo is a formula which applies to all wholes and not merely to organic wholes. Only wholes produce wholes, and only in wholes does the new emerge; wholes form the pathway of creative reality; only the causality of wholes is creative of the new.

This is so because of what I have already pointed out above when discussing how a whole transforms a " cause " or stimulus applied to it into something quite different from what it was before. If an external " cause " is applied to an' organism or a living body it will become internalised and transformed, and will be experienced as a stimulus, which in its turn will be followed by a response. The response is not the mere mechanical effect or equivalent of the cause, and this is due to the complete transformation which the latter has undergone. In the moment which elapses between stimulus and response a miracle is performed; a vast series of organic changes is set going of which comparatively little is known as yet. The inorganic becomes organic, the alien stuff of the environment is recreated into the stuff of the living organism. The organic changes which take place have undoubtedly their physical and chemical equivalents; but even so, they are much more than the mere physico-chemical tale they tell. The stimulus has been transformed and absorbed and become a series of states of the organism; the organism has made the stimulus its own, as it were. And as a result the response is not the mere passive effect of the stimulus, but is the free and spontaneous movement of the organism itself under the influence of the appropriate stimulus. The passive external stimulus has been recreated into an active, free response of the organism. Anything passing through the organic whole undergoes this change, this appropriation of it by the whole as its own. Any action issuing from it has the stamp of the whole upon it. The procedure is transformative, synthetic, recreative, holistic, and the result is new in one degree or another.

From this it will be seen that if the concept of causation is to be retained in connection with organic or psychical activities, it will have to be substantially recast. The resultant activity of an organism under a stimulus is never merely the effect of that stimulus, as it would be in the case of mechanical action, but always of the stimulus as transformed by the organism; the organism appears as the dominant element in the causal concept, and the stimulus appears in a minor role. The more active the state of the organism, and the more thorough its reaction to the stimulus, the less is the influence of the stimulus on the response, which appears as the free and almost original action of the organism. The organic response is often so great compared to the stimulus, it is so out of all proportion to it and so transcends it in every way, that the organism appears clearly as the real cause, and the stimulus merely as a minor condition or excitation.

It is thus seen that the organism is a new system, with its own activities and laws and categories of action and description. It is a new centre, with a large measure of independence of the environment. This does not mean that the environment does not influence 4t, but it means that the environment influences it only indirectly and after a more or less complete transformation and metabolism of such influence. Vis-à-vis the environment the organism is something apart and unique, something sui generis, which does not passively accept and reproduce the influence of the environment, but utilises and appropriates it for its own purposes and in its own ways, as if it were some superior arbiter and disposer of the whole situation. The concepts of dominion, of mastery, of creation which the orthodox view places at the beginning of things are now distributed and assigned to all organisms, whose inmost nature can only be expressed through these concepts. In other words, organism is not so much an effect of external causes; nor are its states and characters merely effects of external causes; it is its own cause--causa sui--the cause of its own states and functions. External environmental influences are merely the rough material with which it works and builds up its own system. And in the act of building the material is itself more or less completely changed into the character of the structure built. I say " more or less," because this character of creative mastery and transformation which organism displays in respect of external influences and materials is itself of a progressive character. In the lower organisms there is much more of passive acceptance and response than in the higher; and the whole process of Evolution is largely a continuous growth towards organic independence and self-regulation; in other words, towards wholeness. The concept of wholeness contains and explains all the distinguishing organic attributes in their various grades throughout the wide range of organic Evolution.

Thus it is that the creative element in Evolution, the emergent new, is associated with the nature and action of wholes, and is confined to them. Not only is the activity of wholes holistic and creative, as yet it is the only creative activity of which we have knowledge. From this discussion it is clear how the concept of Freedom is rooted in that of the organic whole. The whole is free, the parts are bound: such would be a formula of metaphysics. For beyond the whole there is nothing external to determine it, and it is therefore free; while the parts are necessarily bound by their relation to the whole and to each-other in the whole. But we are not concerned with metaphysical wholes, but with those of reality, such as organisms. And we have seen how the functioning of an organic whole releases it from the domination, the causation of the external, and conduces to its freedom. The external causation, the stimulus which operates on it. ab extra, is transformed by its subtle metabolism into something of itself; otherness becomes selfness; the pressure of the external or the other is transformed into the action of itself. The organism is largely detached from its surroundings and centres in itself. Necessity is transformed into freedom. The causal chain of physics becomes the new badge of freedom. The whole, therefore, even in its most humble organic forms, lays the foundations of the new world of freedom. We can arrive at the same result by another line of reasoning, based on the creative process of Holism. Under the physical system the effect equals the cause, and is therefore completely determined by the cause. Causa = effectum. But we have seen how this formula disappears before creative Holism; how the effect comes to contain the new and therefore to transcend its cause. The element of newness, of novelty in the holistic order of the world, means a release from the complete bondage of matter and its causality and necessity. It means a certain latitude for expansion and growth. It widens the range of possibilities; the straight and narrow path of physics becomes the prospect which ultimately widens into the great horizons of life and mind. Freedom broadens out into a world of opportunities. The animal finds that it is no longer imprisoned in its cell like the plant; it begins to move about. Gradually it learns the great lessons of direction and self-direction. The great Experiment of life assumes ever widening degrees of freedom, until finally at the human stage freedom takes conscious control and begins to create the free ethical world of the Spirit. With that development we shall deal at a later stage *of this work. Here it must suffice to have pointed out the humble beginnings of Freedom. And even at this stage it is important to bear in mind that the domain of life is largely distinguished from that of matter and energy by its greater degrees of freedom. Scientists speak of the degrees of freedom even in an inorganic situation. And by this they mean the element of contingency which seems inseparable even from the purely physical order. The causal chain of Nature, the necessity which characterises the procession of physical events, does not exclude elements of chance or contingency. The Quantum law plants this uncertainty in the very heart of Nature. There is an uncertainty about the quantum jump which conflicts with the law of causation and is consistent only with contingency. A quantum event may happen in this way or that way; there are alternatives between which only the actual fact can decide. To these possibilities or. alternatives the phrase 0 degrees of freedom  is applied. But in the domain of life it acquires an added meaning, or rather, let me say, a real meaning. Life is not entirely bound, even in its most primitive forms. Hence its trials and experiments, its variations, its novelties and its creativeness, which become ever more accentuated in its progress. Evolution traces the grand line of escape from the prison of matter to the full freedom of the Spirit. It is clear that the beginnings of freedom are laid far back in the early dawn of life itself, if not earlier.

The above discussion of unified organic functioning, or unity. of action, and of causation, creation, and freedom will suffice to indicate how the whole as factor and concept involves a transformation of physical actions and categories. They have been selected as samples of holistic functions and categories and are not intended to be in any sense an exhaustive enumeration of such functions and categories. A full list would, for instance, include " individuality " and " purposiveness " as essential features, functions, and categories of wholes. They are, however, referred to in Chapter IX in connection with Mind as a holistic organ. At this stage it is only necessary to make the briefest reference to them. Thus with regard to the character and category of individuality it is only necessary to point out here that individuality is distinctive of wholes. Wholes are not arbitrarily divisible and the divided parts are not arbitrarily interchangeable. Every whole has a real character, a unique identity, and an irreversible orientation which distinguishes it from everything else and is the very essence of individuality. And this character of individuality rises with the rise of wholes in the scale of Evolution, and acquires decisive importance at the ultimate level of human Personality. Purposiveness, again, is a special form of that unified organic action which has already been discussed. It means a correlation and unification of actions towards an end, whether this is consciously conceived or apprehended or not. On the animal plane and especially on the psychical level of Evolution it is distinctive of wholes. In an exhaustive treatment of holistic characters and categories individuality and purposiveness would have no less important a place than those above discussed.

Let us now pass on to consider organism as a centre of internal regulation, adjustment and co-ordination of its own functions and activities. The phenomena that meet us here are indeed most wonderful. No cunningly devised machine of human contrivance can rival or even approach in delicacy of co-ordination or fineness as well as complexity of adjustment the organic wholes we see in Nature. Professor Haldane has described the wonderful combination of processes which go to make up the physiology of breathing 1 -a combination which is marvellous enough under normal conditions, but which becomes far more so when we see how curiously breathing adjusts itself to abnormal conditions, to situations artificially brought about, which it has probably never had to face in all time. No " experience " or hereditary " memory " can guide it here; and yet it rises to the occasion every time, within a wonderfully wide range of adaptability and plasticity. Practically every major physiological function shows the same power of co-ordination of various organs and activities, and the same delicacy and ingenuity of adjustment to novel situations. Any one of the functional features involved would be a wonder in itself; but when the co-ordinated combination of all is studied, when, moreover, the great variety of adjustments of this combination to unusual situations is considered, the marvel becomes baffling to our human intelligence. The most delicate processes, involving vast numbers of cooperating factors, happen not clumsily or slowly, but most finely and as it were in less than the twinkling of an eye.

What guides and controls such a complex physiological process? Intelligence such as we know it is clearly not equal to the task; nor have we any reason to ascribe intelligence to organic processes. The assumption of a vital force explains nothing, as our problem concerns something far more subtle and directive than force. Again, to look upon it as a marvellous self-working mechanism does not meet the real situation, which is more than one of mechanism, however marvellous. The theory of Evolution presupposes an original start from simple beginnings, which have multiplied, evolved and become complex in the. course of Evolution. The pure chance combinations presupposed by Mechanists have never ruled the world. There has never been a blind, purely accidental coming together of the elements at the, beginning of things or at any subsequent epoch; and if there had been, the chances against the present organic situation in the world would have been infinite. Not thus has the new arisen and gone forward. The new has always arisen in the bosom of the old, and under its aegis and influence. Not blind chance or contingency but the existing state of affairs has always shaped the course and direction of Evolution. The new arises from the old and largely at its prompting, and thus in harmony with it. Its novelty is very small compared to its essential conservatism. Variation is infinitesimal compared to Heredity. It is this fundamental character of unity, unitariness and wholeness as distinct from mechanical aggregation of parts which seems to me to explain the phenomena of organic regulation and coordination. Organisms, of course, contain a great deal of mechanism; the detailed processes and functions are all carried, out by what one might call organic mechanisms, structures with particular functions assigned to them. But the unification of the entire system and its self-regulating character; its plasticity of co-ordination and adjustment under all the situations of the environment which it has to face and to which it has to adapt itself; its creative movement in time, so different from what one would expect on the second law of thermodynamics; the unique facts of growth, restitution and reproduction, which not even a strained application of the mechanistic scheme would fit-- these are facts and features distinctive of wholes which only the theory of Holism can properly justify and explain.

It may be convenient if, before concluding this chapter, L I give a summary of the various functions which are here assigned to Holism in the shaping of reality.

(A) 1. In the first place, Holism is a creative feature or process, and as such shows itself in the upbuilding and differentiation of organic structures and their functions. These may be modifications or variations or mutations. They may be ordinary specific differences such as explain the origin of different species. These differences may include new organs and structures, or merely the general complexifying of existing structures which makes organisms as a whole more complex. All these aspects of Holism are discussed in Chapter VIII.

2. This creative Holism accounts for the whole course of Evolution, inorganic as well as organic. All the great main types of existence are thus explained, such as the atom, molecule, cell, organism, the groups of plant types, the groups of animal types, and finally the human type. Creative Holism thus accounts for all lhe great divisions of Science. The discussion of these aspects of Holism is spread over various chapters.

(B) 1. In the second place, apart from the detailed structural and functional differentiations above referred to, Holism is a general organising, co-ordinating or regulating process in organisms expressing itself in a measure of guidance, direction and control. The nature of this regulative or controlling activity is discussed in this chapter, and the difficulties it gives rise to in its relation to the body or the energy system generally are discussed in Chapters VII and X.

2. This regulation and control finds expression in the structures and functions of organisms generally, but sometimes special holistic organs are evolved, which seem specially destined to assist in the exercise of this regulation and control. Such special holistic organs are the ductless glands which pour regulative secretions into the general system, the nervous system, and especially the brain with its correlate mind. These and other holistic organs are special aids to Holism as a regulative process. Various aspects of these holistic organs are discussed in different chapters.

C) In the third place, in order to express and explain these features of Holism at the different grades of Evolution and at the various levels of differentiation of types and structures, categories of the Whole or holistic categories are necessary, some of which have been discussed in this chapter and others are dealt with in other chapters. Thus arise the physical, chemical, organic, psychical, and personal categories, which are all expressive of different degrees of Holism at its various levels.

Holism thus appears in this scheme as a fundamental feature of this evolutionary world; and the concept of Holism is one of the ultimate categories of its description and explanation. Holism therefore constitutes a most important, view-point from which to orientate our survey of the various forms and departments of reality.

(D) There is one more aspect of creative Holism which 1 must for the sake of completeness mention, although its exposition falls outside the plan of this work. We have seen that Holism is characteristic of all structures, inorganic as well as organic. Thus it covers all the types of structure in the worlds of matter and life. But more; as we proceed upward in the course of Evolution we find Holism characteristic also of all values. Love, Beauty, Goodness, Truth: they are all of the whole; the whole is their source, and in the whole alone they find their last satisfying explanation. Holism not only formulates the law in the world of structures, forms and organisms; it is the very ground and principle of the ideal world of the spirit. It is in the sphere of spiritual values that Holism finds its clearest embodiment in fact, and its most decisive vindication as an ultimate category of explanation. Its creativeness will nowhere be found more fruitful than in that last and highest reach of its evolution. Here it would be premature to do more than merely refer to this aspect of creative Holism. The exposition of its creative activity in shaping the great Ideals of the Whole is, however, too large a task to be undertaken in this introductory work.

1 Organism and Environment, 1917.
