---
title: "The Holistic Universe"
chapter: 12
---

SUMMARY: The fundamental, seminal character of the concept of Holism is bound to affect our general views of the nature of the universe, our Weltanschauung, and this chapter deals with this wider aspect of Holism.

Holism has been presented in the foregoing chapters as the ultimate synthetic, ordering, organising, regulative feature in the universe which explains all the structural groupings and syntheses in it, from the atom and the physico-chemical structures, through the cell and organisms, through Mind in animals, to Personality in man. The all-pervading and ever-increasing character of synthetic unity or wholeness in these structures leads to the concept of Holism as fundamental, and to the view of the universe as a Holistic Universe.

On a strict and narrow view Science may consider the concept of Holism as extra-scientific, -as giving a metaphysical and not a scientific explanation of things. But this would be a mistake for three reasons. In the first place, the conclusion to which Science is pointing, namely, that the whole universe, inorganic as well as organic, is the expression of cosmic Evolution, necessitates a ground plan which will formulate and explain this vast scientific scheme of things. Mere pre-occupation with detailed mechanisms will no longer suit the immensely enlarged scope of present-day Science. In the second place, Science has already had to assume such ultra scientific entities as, for instance, the ether of space, as necessary to give a coherent explanation even of purely physical phenomena. And the correlation of the physical and organic and psychical in one vast scheme of Evolution similarly necessitates much more universal characters than have been hitherto recognised. Holism is far more necessary for’ cosmic Evolution than was the ether for light transmission. In the third place, Holism is essentially no more ultra-scientific than are life and mind; it is simply a wider concept than either and is the genus of which they are the species. And it enables all the evolutionary phenomena of Nature to be co-ordinated under and traced to the same fundamental feature.

The New Physics has traced the physical universe to Action; and Relativity has led to the concept of Space-Time as the medium 3M for this Action. Space-Time means structure or pattern in the widest sense, and thus the universe as we know it starts as structural Action; Action which is, however, not confined to its structures, but continually overflows into their “ fields ” and becomes the basis for the active dynamic Evolution which creatively shapes the universe. The “ creativeness” of evolutionary Holism, and its procedure by way of small increments or instalments of “ creation/’ are its most fundamental characters, from which all the particular forms and characteristics of the universe flow.

The ignorance or neglect of these two fundamental characters accounts for the elements of error involved in certain widely held world-conceptions, such as Naturalism, Idealism, Monadism and Spiritual Pluralism or Panpsychism. Naturalism is wrong where it fails to recognise that there is creative Evolution, and that real new entities have arisen in the universe, in addition to the -physical beginnings. Idealism is wrong where it fails to recognise that the Spirit or Psyche, although now a real factor, did not exist either explicitly or implicitly at the beginning, and has arisen creatively in the course of organic Evolution. The Monadism of Leibniz and his modern sympathisers, while a great advance in that it recognises the inward holistic element in things and persons, yet goes wrong when it attributes an element of Mind or Spirit to physical things like atoms or chemical structures. While things may be wholes they are not yet souls; and the view of the universe as a Society of Spirits ignores the fact that spirit is a more recent creative arrival in the universe and cannot’ be retrospectively antedated to the earlier material phase. Spiritual Pluralism is a modern refinement of Monadism and similarly subject to the criticism that it fails to recognise the really creative character of Evolution.

This is a world of whole-making, not of soul-making merely. The view of the universe as purely spiritual, as transparent to the Spirit, fails to account for its dark opaque character ethically and rationally; for its accidental and contradictory features, its elements pf error, sin and suffering, which will not be conjured away by an essentially poetic world-view. Holism explains both the realism and the idealism at the heart of things, and is therefore a more accurate description of reality than any of these more or less partial and one-sided world-views.

Nature or the Universe is sometimes metaphorically spoken of as a Whole or The Whole. Sometimes it is even personified, and the trend of Evolution then becomes the Purpose of some transcendent Mind. All this is, however, unwarranted by the facts and unnecessary as an explanation of Evolution. Holism as an inner evolving principle of direction and control in all Evolution is enough; it underlies the variations which arise and survive in the right direction, and it creates in the “ field ” of Nature a general environment of internal and external control. The “ wholeness or holistic character of Nature appears mostly in this field or environment of Nature, with its friendly intimate influences, and its subtle appeal to all the wholes in Nature, and especially to the spiritual in us.. The fact is that the Holism in Nature is very close to us and a real support in all our striving towards betterment. Our aspiration is its inspiration, and it is thus the inner guarantee of eventual victory in spite of all set-backs and defeats.

THIS is not a treatise on Philosophy; not even on the philosophy of Nature; not even on the philosophy of Evolution. It is an exploration of one idea, an attempt to sketch in large and mostly vague, tentative outline the meaning and the consequences of one particular idea. But that is a seminal idea; indeed it is here presented as more than an idea, as a fundamental feature and principle in the universe. As such it is bound to affect our general view of the nature of the universe. I therefore come in this concluding chapter to consider what Holism means for our general world-view, our Weltanschauung, and as briefly as possible to sum up the bearing which the argument of the preceding chapters must have on such a general conception of the universe.

Holism has been our theme--Holism as a dominant feature in the universe, the basic concept and categories of action of which can be more or less definitely formulated. I have in the broadest outline sketched the progress of Holism from its simple mechanical inorganic beginnings to its culmination in the human Personality. All through we have seen it as the fundamental synthetic, ordering, organising, regulating feature in the universe, marked by categories which, while essentially the same everywhere, assume ever more closely unified and synthetic forms in the progressive course of its evolution. Appearing at first as the chemical affinities, attractions and repulsions, and selective groupings which lie at the base of all material aggregations, it explains the constitution of the atom, and the structural organising of atoms and molecules in the constitution of matter. Next, after some gaps which are being energetically explored by biology and bio-chemistry, and still as a fundamental synthetic selective feature, it has emerged on a much higher level of organisation in the cell of life, and again explains the ordered grouping of cells in the life-structures of organisms, both of the plant and the animal type, and in the progressive complexifying of these structures in the course of organic Evolution. The synthetic character in these organic structures has been so far-reaching that the independent existence of the original unit cells has sometimes been questioned, and the organism has been taken as the synthetic unit, of which the cell is but a defined portion of nucleated protoplasm.1

In other words, the organic synthesis of cells has been such as practically to lead to the suppression of the individual cells as such. Next, in the higher animals and especially in man, Holism has emerged in the new mutation or series of mutations of Mind, in which its synthetic co-ordinating activity has risen to an unheard-of level, has turned in upon itself and become experience, and has achieved virtual independence in the form of consciousness. Finally, it appears as a synthesis of all its previous structures, including Mind, in a supreme structural unity in Human Personality, which has assumed a dominating position over’ all. the other structures and strata of existence, and has in a sense become a new centre and arbiter of reality. Thus the four great series in reality-- matter, life, mind and Personality--apparently so far removed from each other, are seen to be but steps in the progressive evolution of one and the same fundamental feature, whose pathway is the universe within us and around us. Holism constitutes them all, connects them all and, so far as explanations are at all possible, explains and accounts for them all. Holism is matter and energy at one stage; it is organism and life at another stage; and it is mind and Personality at its latest stage. And all its protean forms can in a measure be explained in terms of its fundamental characters, as I have tried to show. All the problems of the universe, not only those of matter and life, but also and. especially those of mind and personality, which determine human nature and destiny, can in the last resort only be resolved--in so far as they are at all humanly soluble--by reference to the fundamental concept of Holism. For this reason I have called our universe “ the Holistic universe/ as the feature of Holism is basic to its constitution, its multitudinous forms and its processes, its history in the past, and its promise and potency for the future.2

The scientist, viewing my claims for Holism in the dry light of Science, might perhaps feel tempted to demur to them. He might object that Holism is a mere assumption which may have a philosophical or metaphysical value, but that it has no scientific importance, as it cannot be brought to the test of actual facts and experiments. Holism as here presented, he will say, is not a matter for Science; it is an ultra-scientific entity or concept. It falls outside the scope of Science, and the explanation of things which it purports to give is not a scientific explanation. Even assuming that there is such a feature as Holism in the universe, it would have no value for Science. To be of interest to Science, it must make a difference to actual facts and therefore be capable of experimental verification. But clearly Holism, owing to its pervasiveness and universality, cannot be so tested. As its presence would not be revealed by an examination of the particular facts, mechanisms and phenomena with which Science deals, it is unnecessary for Science to take any further interest in it.

I hope I have fairly summarised the attitude which Science might perhaps feel impelled to adopt towards the claims I have put forward on behalf of Holism. And I would reply by pointing out what seems to me to be the weakness or rather the one-sidedness and partialness in this strictly scientific attitude. Science seems to me to take too narrow a view of her sphere and functions when she confines herself merely to details, to the investigation and description of the detailed mechanisms and processes in regard to matters falling within her province. A description of analytical details, however true so far as it goes, is not yet a full and proper account of the thing or matter to be described. It is not enough; the details must be supplemented by a description which will take us back to the whole embracing those details. The anatomy and physiology of a plant would surely not be sufficient as a description of the plant itself. No description of the parts is a complete description of the whole object; it is only a partial descripton, and falls short of a true and full account in proportion as the object partakes of the character of a whole; where the object, for instance, is what I have called a biological or psychical whole. We may say generally that wherever an object shows structure or organisation (as every object does) a full description of it would involve at the very least an account of this structure or organisation as a whole, in addition to its detailed mechanisms and functions. And where many objects show similar or related structures, a proper description would involve an account of the ground-plan of organisation affecting them all. Thus in regard to organic and inorganic Evolution, where the whole world of matter and life and mind can be grouped into progressive series of structures from the beginning to the end, a scientific account of the universe would necessarily involve the working out of the universal ground plan which expresses this Evolution. And it can but add to the value of such a ground-plan that it is not merely descriptive but also attempts to be self-explanatory. A plan or scheme, is by its very nature not properly stated unless it is not merely described but also explained and’ accounted for as far as possible by causal concepts. Now I ask, what else is Holism but such an attempted ground-plan of the universe, which is of a self-explanatory character, a ground-plan which makes the whole scheme the progressive exemplification and effect of a given feature? It may be objected that ultimate causes lie beyond-the purview of Science. But even so the descriptive ground-plan of Holism would remain and would challenge serious consideration Aon scientific grounds,? To me the issue seems quite simple. So long as Science eschewed all wider view-points (as she modestly did in her earlier years) and confined her attention to particular areas of facts, such as are embraced by the separate sciences, she was quite entitled to look upon a general explanatory ground plan of Evolution as too ambitious for her and as falling outside her proper sphere. But once she abandons this sectional standpoint and comes to look upon the entire universe as evolutionary (as she now does), she is bound to examine a scheme such as is here put forward on its merits as falling within her universal province.

Science has been compelled in other instances to complete and support her account of detailed processes by the assumption of factor which lie beyond the area of observation, but without which the detailed processes become unintelligible. Thus the assumption of the ether of space was resorted to as the basis of the undulatory theory for the transmission of radiant energy. Although ether admittedly lies beyond the area of scientific observation and experiment, and no test however delicate has ever revealed its actual existence, it was long accepted as one of the conceptual entities which were ’necessary to complete the coherent system of Science, and indeed as a real physical element in the universe. It is true that ether seems to have fallen on evil days and that its existence or conceptual necessity is being more and more questioned by various groups of physicists. But it has admirably served its xn purpose I4as a scientific hypothesis, and the legitimacy of such a hypothesis was never questioned by even the most rigid school of scientists. And I would submit that the case for Holism is much stronger than that for ether ever was, as ether- was meant to account only for one particular group of phenomena in physics, white “Holism in the main phases of its development is necessary to account for the facts and phenomena of Evolution, both organic and inorganic. The plain fact is that, as our intellectual outlook widens and the intellectual horizons. recede more and more, the domain of Science is undergoing an ever greater expansion, and therefore the formulation  of new principles and new concepts embodying them becomes necessary for the support and the coherence of the whole vast scheme of Science. Science is thus for ever encroaching on the domain of philosophy and the other great disciplines of the Reason or the Spirit, and it becomes ever more difficult to confine her activities within the old orthodox limits. Holism no doubt breaks new ground; it is here intended as the basis of a new Weltanschauung within the general framework of Science; it is meant to be the foundation of a new system of unity and inward character in our outlook upon the universe as a whole. But it does not fall outside the province of Science in the larger sense. And it does not introduce strange, alien concepts into the sphere of Science. It is only a more universal character than Science has hitherto envisaged.

I would also point out that the scientific objection to Holism as above formulated would, in fact, be identical with the objection which mechanistic Science has taken to life and mind as factors in the universe--an objection which Science is feeling herself ever more strongly compelled to overrule. The difficulty to verify Holism in the detailed mechanisms and functions would be the same as the difficulty to verify life and mind as real factors in organic and human structures. Holism is really no more than an attempt to extend the system of life and mind, with the necessary modifications and qualifications, to inorganic Evolution, and to show the underlying identity of this system at all the stages of Evolution. In life the character of the system becomes clear, in mind still more so. That is no reason to look upon it as non-existent in the case of matter. The facts submitted in the foregoing chapters disclose a more or less connected, graduated, evolutionary series covering the phenomena of matter no less than of life and mind. Holism is a feature of the universe which formulates and accounts for the fundamental ground-plan of this series. It is therefore very much of the same order of ideas as life and mind, and stands or falls very much by the same lines of reasoning as they.

The graduated serial character of the universe has led to the theory of Evolution. But it is clear that that serial character can only rest on universal basic features. A connected graduated system of facts implies not only a particular method of their becoming, such as the theory of Evolution formulates, but also a common origin and common pervading characters behind the system. In life and still more in mind we get clear indications of these characters. All that remains is to take a wider view and to bring all the facts and phenomena of the universe within the scope of this common method and origin. We then reach the concept of Holism as embracing life and mind, but covering a much wider area and forming, in fact, the genus of which they are the species. All Evolution then becomes the manifestation of a specific fundamental, universal feature or character.

Having thus attempted to vindicate Holism as a proper scientific concept in the wider sense, let us now proceed to sketch the main distinguishing features of the Holistic universe, in other words, of the conception of the universe which results from the principles discussed in the foregoing chapters. The final net result is that this is a whole-making universe, that it is the fundamental character of this universe to be composed of wholes, of ever more complete and advanced wholes, and that the Evolution of the universe, inorganic and organic, is nothing but the record of this whole-making feature of the universe. Let me briefly summarise the main points in the preceding argument which lead up to this result.

We have seen that this is an essentially and wholly active universe; that its apparent passiveness as matter is nothing but massed energy, and that activity is therefore its fundamental character. Indeed, energy itself is too narrow and metrical a term to do justice to this character of the physical universe as concrete activity. Activity in time, energy multiplied by time, Action as it is technically called in physics, is the physical basis of the universe as a whole, and nothing besides. The universe is a flowing stream in Space-Time, and its reality is not intelligible apart from this concept of activity. So much the new Relativity has made us realise; and to this conclusion the profoundest reflections on the nature of the universe also tend. For us, constituted as we are, the universe starts and takes its origin in Action. With deeper meaning than ever before we realise that “ Im Anfang war die That.” It is, of course, conceivable that much lies beyond and back of this beginning as it appears to us. It may be that the universe of Action has itself evolved out of a prior order which lies beyond human ken; that there is an infinite regress of celestial Evolution into time past; and that the physical universe as it now appears to or is conceived by us is the evolved result of inconceivable prior developments. We do not know, and speculation would be barren and futile.

The physical stuff of the universe is therefore really and truly Action in its various patterns or configurations, and nothing else. But when we say that, when we make activity instead of matter the stuff or material of the universe, a new view-point is subtly introduced. For the associations of matter are different from those of Action, and the dethronement of matter in our fundamental physical conception of the universe and its replacement by Action must profoundly modify our general outlook and viewpoints. The New Physics may prove a solvent for some of the most ancient and hardest concepts of traditional human experience and has brought a rapprochement and reconciliation between the material and organic or psychical orders within measurable distance. I must refer to the concluding portion of the third chapter for a statement of this far-reaching advance which has been made by Science within this century. That is the contribution of the New Physics to the new outlook.

Action in Space-Time is necessarily structural; indeed Space-Time supplies the co-ordinates, the framework of the Activity which is the ultimate stuff of the world. Space-Time is the structure; hence Action in Space-Time, in the first phase of Holism, is purely structural and pattern-like, as we saw in Chapter VII. The recognition of the fundamental structural or pattern-like character not only of matter but of the whole universe is the contribution of the Relativity theory to the new outlook. The physical world thus becomes at bottom structural Action, Activity structuralised in bodies, things, events. Thus arises the apparent material universe which surrounds us and in our bodies forms part of us.

What is the next step? Action does not come to a stop in its structures, it remains Action, it remains in action; In other words, there is more in bodies, things and events than is contained in their structures, patterns, or material forms. All things overflow their own structural limits, the inner Action transcends the outer structure, and there is thus a trend in things beyond themselves. This inner trend in things springs from their very essence as localised, imprisoned Action. From this follow two important conclusions. The first is the concept of things as more than their apparent structures, and their “ fields ” as complementary to their full operation and understanding. A thing does not come to a stop at its boundaries or bounding surfaces. It is overflowing Action, it passes beyond its bounds, and its surrounding “ field ” is therefore essential not only to its correct appreciation as a thing, but also to a correct understanding of things in general, and especially of the ways in which they affect each other. I have tried, at various points in the foregoing discussion, to emphasise the great importance of this concept of “ fields ” not only for physics but also for biology and philosophy.

The second and more important conclusion is the great fact and concept of Evolution. The inner character of the universe as Action expresses itself in actuality as a passage, a process, a passing beyond existing forms and structures, and thus the way is opened up for Evolution. The actual character of Evolution can, of course, only be concluded and known from the facts, and is not a matter of logical inference deducible from the nature of the universe as Action. But if activity is the essence of the universe we see more easily why the universe is evolutionary and historical rather than static and unchangeable. There is a passage, a process, a progress, but its characters can only be determined by a study of the facts of the passage. It may turn out to be merely a movement of combinations and groupings; or it may turn out to be an unfolding, explication and filling out, an evolution in the stricter sense; or it may turn out to be a real creative Evolution such as we have seen it to be. Real Evolution requires other concepts besides those of Action and structure; and these concepts can only be derived from experience. Thus the actual creativeness of Evolution is a conclusion not so much from theory as from the empirical facts. And the exact nature of this creativeness is unknown in some respects and remains a problem for the future to solve.1

A still wider survey and closer scrutiny of the facts lead to the conception of Holism which accounts not only for the structural combinations of bodies, things and events, but for all the progressive series of unities and syntheses which have arisen in the cosmic process.

Assuming that Holism and the nature of wholes in the universe have been sufficiently explained in the foregoing chapters, I now proceed to compare the world-view to which Holism leads with those which resemble or touch it at various points and yet are essentially different from it.

The Holistic view agrees with the Naturalistic conception of physical science in giving the fullest importance to the physical aspect of the universe. It does full justice. to the structural and mechanistic characters of Nature, and indeed it considers Mechanism simply an earlier phase of Holism, and therefore perfectly legitimate up to a point. It affirms the validity of the fundamental laws and principles of physics not only for inorganic bodies but also for organisms, in so far as they are material. It represents the organic order as arising from and inside the inorganic or physical order without in any way derogating from it. If in the end it erects on the physical a superstructure which is more and more ideal and spiritual, that does not mean a denial of the physical. Holism does not deny matter, but affirms and welcomes and affectionately embraces it. If Holism begins as naturalism and ends as idealism, it does not spurn or deny its own past; in Holism both naturalism and idealism have their proper place and function and indeed find their justification and reconciliation. It breaks with Naturalism only at the point where Naturalism becomes purely materialistic, and in effect denies the creative plasticity of Nature, presents Nature as an anatomical museum, as a collection of dead and dried disjecta membra, instead of the interwoven body of living, creative, progressive unities and syntheses which she essentially is. Naturalism represents the universe as a vast reservoir of energy, unalterable in amount but steadily deteriorating in character, subject to immutable laws and fixed equations which prevent anything essentially new from ever arising or having arisen. It thus negatives the concept of creative Evolution except as a mere figure of speech. It presents life and mind as mere wandering insubstantial shadows on the shores of this ocean of energy; the great Mirage of Evolution broods over the waters; and Man himself, so far from being a creative factor in reality as a whole, becomes an impotent spectator of this melancholy scene, wrapped up in the illusions of his own self-consciousness. Such a view of the universe seems to me hopelessly one-sided and distorted, and comes into direct conflict with large and important bodies of facts of experience which cannot be denied or reasoned away. To me the rock on which Naturalism must split is the fact of creative Evolution. In the first chapter I pointed out that the old materialistic Naturalism is inconsistent with a clear and frank recognition of the great fact of Evolution, and in the body of this work I have tried to drive the point further home. If Evolution is a fact, them Naturalism is not enough.

Creativeness is the key-word and the key-position, not only so far as Naturalism is concerned, but also as regards those other world-conceptions which are most hostile to Naturalism, such as the various modern forms of Spiritual Idealism. Naturalism imposes the past on the present and the future; Idealism, again, imposes the present and the future on the past. Both implicitly deny that creative Evolution which shows the universe historically as a gradual transformation, as a real creative process moving from the real structures of the past to the real structures of the future; and therefore as a system which in its historical development embraces and gives justification to both contrasted points of view. To view the ideal or spiritual element in the universe as the primordial dominant factor is to ignore the fact that the universe was before ever the ideal or spiritual had appeared on the horizon; that the ideal or spiritual is a new and indeed recent creation in the order of the universe, that it was not implicit in the beginnings and has not been reached by a process of unfolding; but that from a real pre-existing order of things it has been creatively evolved as a new factor; and that its importance to-day should not be retrospectively antedated to a time when the world existed without it. Where was the Spirit when the warm Silurian seas covered the face of the earth, and the lower types of fishes and marine creatures still formed the crest of the evolutionary wave? Or going still further back, where was the Spirit when in the Pre-Cambrian system of the globe the first convulsive movements threw up the early mountains which have now entirely disappeared from the face of the earth, and when the living forms, if any, were of so low a type that none have been deciphered yet in the geological record? Where was the Spirit when the Solar System itself was still a diffuse cold nebula? The evolutionary facts of Science are beyond dispute, and they support the view of the earth as existing millions of years before ever the psychical or spiritual order had arisen; and what is true of the earth may be similarly true of the universe as a whole. The fact that we have to grasp firmly in connection with creative Evolution is that, while the spiritual or psychical factor is a real element in the universe, it is a comparatively recent arrival in the evolutionary order of things; that the universe existed untold millions of years before its arrival; and that it is just as wrong for Idealism to deny the world before the appearance of Spirit, as it is for Naturalism to deny Spirit when eventually it did appear in the world.

Creative Evolution seems to move forward by small steps of instalments or increments of creativeness. Why there should be this discontinuity rather than a smooth continuous advance we cannot say; we can but note the fact, which seems to be a universal phenomenon. Not only does matter in its atomic and elemental structure show this minute discontinuity, but the electric elements in the atom, and in the electric current generally, and the quanta of heat and radiant energy show the same remarkable feature. Thus the unit character of Action and Structure is reproduced in the unit character of Evolution and of nuclear change in the cell. There is real creation as distinct from mere combinations of pre-existing units or mere unfolding of implicit elements; but this creation is not consummated in one supreme creative Act; nor is it evenly and uniformly distributed throughout all time. Its distribution is unevenly spread in minute parcels over the whole almost infinite range of Evolution. Evolution thus becomes a long-drawn-out process of creation, in which the new for ever arises by slow and minute increments from the old, or rather by way of the old, as it is not known how the new actually arises from the old. As I have explained in Chapter VII, Holism describes the trend of this advance. It shows the direction of the advance, and how the new element of advance is synthetically incorporated with the pre-existing structure. It thus harmonises the old and the new in its own unity; it synthesises Variation and Heredity; and by slow degrees and over enormous periods of time it traces the. creative process from the most simple, primitive, inorganic beginnings to the most exalted spiritual creations. From the atomic the Soul, from matter to Personality is a long way, marked by innumerable steps, each of which involved a real creative advance and added something essentially new to what had gone before. Such seems to be the nature of Evolution, and it appears to be fatal alike to the retrospective interpretation of the universe according to Idealism, and the prospective interpretation according to Naturalism. Mind or Spirit did not exist at the beginning, either implicitly or explicitly; but it does most certainly exist now as a real factor.

Another world-conception which may be considered as having considerable affinities with the Holistic view is that of Leibniz’s Monadology. The resemblance is, however, confined to certain aspects of the respective central ideas; beyond those aspects the two views are totally and essentially different. There is a close resemblance between the central ideas of wholes and monads; that is all. The unities and units which exist jn Nature seemed to Leibniz to be of the greatest importance for the interpretation of the universe; not the One but the Many and their intimate nature seemed to him to supply the key to the great riddle. I have in the foregoing reached the concept of wholes by a different process of reasoning from that followed by Leibniz, but the result looks very much like that arrived at by him along different lines. And the convergence of the two views from totally different standpoints would appear to suggest that there is a substantial element of truth and value in the concept of wholes, as there undoubtedly is in the Leibnizian theory of Monads. They agree in having an innerness, in being little worlds of their own, with their own inner laws of development and with a certain measure of inner self-direction or self-conservation which makes them partial mirrors or expressions of the greater reality. But the monads according to Leibniz are essentially spiritual entities or selves, conceived on the analogy of the human mind, and their activities are of a purely psychical character such as perception. They are, moreover, absolutely closed, isolated, self-contained units, each with its own immutable inner system, uninfluenced by any other monad; and all maintained in- harmony with each other by some divine pre-established order outside of them. The greater and lesser selves of the universe lead their own inner self-existences, without any contact between one another, and only the divine interposition maintains a Pre-established Harmony between them. There is a scale of these monads, from the lowest most simple, such as atoms or molecules, whose confused perceptions produce the world of matter, to the highest most complex in the universe, such as human minds, whose clear and distinct perceptions produce the world of spirit. God Himself is but the Supreme Monad of monads on this view. It will be seen how different this monadic conception is from that of wholes developed in this work. In the first place, wholes are not all spiritual entities, and the world is not a hierarchy of spirits exclusively, as Leibniz conceived it. Spiritual wholes are merely the apex and crowning feature of the universe, while non-spiritual (material or organic) wholes compose its earlier phases. In the second place, wholes are not closed, isolated systems externally; they have their fields in which they intermingle and influence each other. The Holistic universe is a profoundly reticulated system of interactions and inter-connections rising into a real society in its later phases. In the third place, genetic relationships connect the entire Holistic universe. Wholes from the lowest to the highest are akin and form one great family, and are derived from one another in the process called Evolution. In the fourth place, it is the ascertainable character of this evolutionary process which holds all the wholes together in one vast network of adaptations and harmonious co-ordinations, and not some mystic assumed Pre-established Harmony. Leibniz, while he correctly guessed the real secret in his idea of Monads, missed yet the true explanation through not having any knowledge of creative Evolution, such as the deepen science of our day has revealed to us. To him Evolution was a mere unfolding of an implicit content; he adhered to the traditional preformation views of his day as well as to the current belief in the fixity of species. He could not, therefore, realise the idea that monads were genetically related and evolved; and that the order which underlay the series of monads from the lowest to the highest was of a creative character. In the absence of genetic relationships and creative Evolution, he had to make shift with the notions of isolated inner selves and a pre-established harmony. We may therefore say that just as both Naturalism and Idealism are shattered on the rock of creative Evolution, so likewise the Monadology, however valuable and suggestive in other respects, founders on that same rock, which was, however, still secret and undisclosed to the science of Leibniz’s time. But for that ignorance who knows whether Leibniz might not have elaborated a far more adequate and suggestive Holistic conception than that contained in this poor effort.

The astonishing thing is that thinkers of our own time, who are not only conversant with the idea of creative Evolution but convinced adherents of it, fail to adjust their view-points to it. Thus the late Professor James Ward, who advocated the view of Evolution as epigenesis or creative synthesis, and whose Pluralism has close affinities to the Monadology, seems yet to have failed to realise that his view of Evolution as creative was in conflict with his spiritual Pluralism or Panpsychism. His Pluralistic universe also consists entirely of spiritual monads or entities; and this implies the possession of spiritual or psychical characters not only on the part of the higher monads, like persons, but also on the part of the most’ rudimentary monads, such as atoms and chemical compounds. Spinoza, who otherwise differed widely from Leibniz, had also assumed that all things were in their several degrees animata, but he had the excuse of being, like Leibniz, ignorant of the idea of creative Evolution. But Ward, in spite of his fuller knowledge, calmly follows Leibniz and Spinoza in their error. The plain fact, of course, is that psychism or spiritualism can by no stretch of language be ascribed to mere bits of matter or energy or physical entities like atoms or chemical compounds without the gravest confusion. The very idea of creative Evolution or epigenesis is that both life and mind are later arrivals in the evolutionary series, and cannot possibly be antedated to the mere physical level of Evolution. There is not a great Society of Spirits in the universe, of which Persons and Things, Souls and Atoms, alike are members on the same spiritual footing. When the term “ Spiritual ” is stretched that far and spread that thin, it loses all real value and becomes a mere empty figure of speech. There is indeed no such spiritual Society of the whole universe, but there is the Holistic order, which is something far greater, and stretches from the beginning to the end, and through all grades and degrees of holistic self-fulfilment. Holism, not Spiritualism, is the key to the interpretation of the universe. Mind is not at the beginning but at the end, but Holism is everywhere and all in all. If the universe were a great spiritual Society of lower and higher souls or spirits, Evolution as creative would become meaningless; it would be merely a process of explication of the implicit spirituality (if any) inherent in the universe. The Holistic view thus not merely negatives the far-reaching spiritual assumptions of the Monadology, or Panpsychism, but it is also in firm agreement with the teachings of science and experience. Nor does it, in fact, detract from the value or importance of the universe. It but impresses on us the necessity of that great lesson of humility which is the ethical message of Evolution. It shows that values should not be confused with origins, and that from origins the most lowly may be. raised values the most exalted and spiritual in the order of the universe. The Great Society of the universe leaves a place for the most humble inanimate inorganic structure no less than for the crowning glory of the great soul. To conceive the universe otherwise is to indulge in anthropomorphism, which may be pleasing to our vanity, but in reality detracts from the richness and variety of the universe. The Holistic universe embraces all the real structures from the lowest to the highest in their own right and as they are, without decking them in spiritual habiliments which are alien to their true nature. This world, in the noble language of Keats, is indeed the valley of soul-making; but it could not be that if the valley itself consisted of nothing but souls. To those who have the deepest experience of life, this world is not only the upward path for the soul, but a very hard and flinty one. To attempt to pave that rugged way with the roses of the spiritual order would be a profound mistake from every point of view.

To say this is not to assume that there is anything alien or antagonistic between the human soul and the natural environment in which it finds itself in this world. There is not only poetic value but profound truth in the spiritual interpretation of Nature to which Wordsworth and other great poets of Nature have accustomed us. And that truth is not merely due to the creative part which mind plays in the shaping and fashioning of Nature. It is not merely that we invest Nature with our own emotional attributes. It is, in fact, to be traced to far deeper sources in our human origins. For we are indeed one with Nature; her genetic fibres run through all our being; our physical organs connect us with millions of years of her history; our minds are full of immemorial paths of pre-human experience. Our ear for music, our eye for art, carry us back to the early beginnings of animal life on this globe. Press but a button in our brain, and the gaunt spectres of the dim forgotten past rise once more before us; the ghostly dreaded forms of the primeval Fear loom before us and we tremble all over with inexplicable fright. And then again some distant sound, some call of bird or smell of wild plants, or some sunrise or sunset glow in the distant cloudy some mixture of light and shade on the mountains, may suddenly throw an unearthly spell over the spirit, lead it forth from the deep chambers, and set it panting and wondering with inexpressible emotions. For the overwrought mind there is no peace like Nature’s, for the wounded spirit there is no healing like hers. There are indeed times when human companionship becomes unbearable, and we fly to Nature for that silent sympathy and communion which she alone can give. Some of the deepest emotional experiences of my life have come to me on the many nights I have spent under the open African sky; and I am sure my case has not been singular in this respect. The intimate rapport with Nature is one of the most precious things in life. Nature is indeed very close to us; sometimes perhaps closer than hands and feet, of which in truth she is but the extension. The emotional appeal of Nature is tremendous, sometimes almost more than one can bear. But to explain it we need not make the unwarrantable assumption of a universal animism or animatism, and invest inanimate things with souls kindred to our own. Evolution, with the genetic relationships and fundamental kinship it implies, accounts for all this intimate emotional appeal. The idea of the universe as a spiritual Society of Souls is a poetical idealised picture, and not in accord with the sober realistic, scientific view of the facts. This is a universe of whole-making, not merely of soul-making, which is only its climax phase. The universe is not a pure transparency of Reason or Spirit. It contains unreason and contradiction, it contains error and evil, sin and suffering. There are grades and gaps, there are clashes and disharmonies between the grades. It is not the embodiment of some simple homogeneous human Ideal. It is profoundly complex and replete with unsearchable diversity and variety. It is the expression of a creative process which is for ever revealing new riches and supplying new unpredictable surprises. But the creative process is not, on that account, issuing in chaos and hopeless irreconcilable conflict. It is for ever mitigating the conflict through a higher system of controls. It is for ever evolving new and higher wholes as the organs of a greater harmony. Through the steadily rising series of wholes it is producing ever more highly organised centres whose inner freedom and creative metabolism transform the fetters of fate and the contingencies of circumstance into the freedom and harmony of a more profoundly co-operative universe. But though the crest of the spiritual wave is no doubt steadily rising, the ocean which supports it contains much more besides the Spirit. Enough for us to know that the lower is not in hopeless enmity to the higher, but its basis and support, a feeder to it, a source whence it mysteriously draws its creative strength for further effort, and hence the necessary pre-condition for all further advance. Thus beneath all logical or ethical disharmonies there exists the deeper creative, genetic harmony between the lower and the higher grades in the Holistic series.

Reference must be made to one more question or set of questions before we conclude. I have said before that the scope of this work is limited, and that it is not intended to deal exhaustively with the entire subject of Holism. But within the limits of the introductory task which I have set myself here, one problem remains to be mentioned. It is the problem of The Whole, the great whole itself as distinguished from the lesser wholes which we have found as the texture of Evolution. In other words, is there a Whole, a Supreme Whole, of which all lesser wholes are but parts or organs? And if there is such a Whole of wholes, how is it to be conceived? Is it to be conceived on the analogy of an organism, as Nature? Or is it to be conceived on the analogy of Mind and Personality as a Supreme divine Personality? Or are both these conceptions inadmissible, and js there some other way of conceiving the system of wholes in their actual or possible synthesis? These are very difficult and thorny questions, but it is clear that we cannot leave the consideration of wholes at the present stage pf our argument. For that argument implies clearly something more to complete it, even in the preliminary way which is all that is intended in this work.

Two points arise from the preceding discussion which naturally carry us forward to the consideration of these larger questions. In the first place, where do we fix the limits of a lesser whole? In a whole we have in eluded its field; but how far does this field extend? What limits are there to the field of an inorganic body, or an organism, or a Personality? Leibniz represented each monad as containing or mirroring the whole universe in its own way and from its own particular angle; lower monads, of course, more imperfectly than higher monads; but each in its own degree is a sort of microcosm or miniature universe. In other words, each tiniest least monad is in a sense cosmic and universal. This description would not apply to a field. As we have seen, a field is of the same character as the inner area of the whole, only more attenuated in its force and influence, and the farther it recedes from that area the greater the attenuation; so that the field, though theoretically indefinite in extent, is in effect quite limited in practical operation. When we come to consider a group of wholes we see that, while the wholes may be mutually exclusive, their fields overlap and penetrate and reinforce each other, and thus create an entirely new situation. Thus we speak of the atmosphere of ideas, the spirit of a class, or the soul of a people. The social individuals as such remain unaltered, but the social environment or field undergoes a complete change. There is a multiplication of force in the society or group owing to this mutual penetration of the conjoint fields, which creates the appearance and much of the reality of a new organism. Hence we speak of social or group or national organisms. But as a matter of fact there is no new organism; the society or group is organic without being an organism; holistic without being a whole. The mentality of a crowd as distinct from the number of individuals composing it is a good illustration of the changed and reinforced mental field which results from the meeting of many individuals and the fusion and heightening of their conjoint fields. And the more psychic they are, the more they are under the influence of strong passions or carried away by some contagious idea, the more overpowering the common field becomes. The force of the group field is generally out of all proportion to the strength of the idea or the passions in the individual units composing the group. The group field is so to say the multiplication of all the individual fields. The subject falls under the study of social psychology and is referred to here only for the purpose of illustration! We have in such cases an organic situation but not an organism. Groups, families, churches, societies, nations are organic but not organisms.

Taking all the wholes in the world and viewing them together in Nature, we see a similar interpenetration and enrichment of the common field. When we speak of Nature we do not mean a collection of unconnected items, we mean wholes with their interlocking fields; we mean a creative situation which is far more than the mere gathering of individuals and their separate fields. This union of fields is creative of a new and indefinable spirit or atmosphere; the external mechanical situation is transformed into an inward synthetic, “organic” situation or atmosphere. This “ organic ” Nature seems in certain situations to be alive to us, to stir strange unsuspected depths in us, to make an appeal to our emotional nature which often “ lies too deep for tears.” Thus we come to consider Nature as an organism; we personify her, we even deify and worship her. But the sober fact is that there is no new whole or organism of Nature; there is only Nature become organic through the intensification of her total field. In other words, Nature is holistic without being a real whole.

Nor is it merely we humans, with our intense psychic sensitivity, who feel this appeal of organic or holistic Nature. AH organic creatures feel it too. The new science of Ecology is simply a recognition of the fact that all organisms feel the force and moulding effect of their environment as a whole. There is much more in Ecology than merely the striking down of the unfit by way of Natural Selection. There is a much more subtle and far-reaching influence within the special or local fields of Nature than is commonly recognised or suspected. Sensitivity to appropriate fields is not confined to humans, but is shared by animals and plants throughout organic Nature.

There is a second point which emerges from the foregoing chapters and leads up to the issue now under discussion.

In Chapter VII we have spoken of a general common trend of Evolution, of Evolution as not tacking and veering about, but as moving in one general direction, as keeping a general course and direction through all the endless ages of her voyaging. How is this to be explained? Here again, the expedient of personification is often resorted to for the purpose of finding an explanation. It is said that Evolution discloses a grand inner Purpose, that Nature or the universe is purposive or teleological, and that no other category will do justice to the great fact of Evolution as we see it. But if there is purpose there must be a Mind behind that purpose. And thus Mind comes to be personified in Nature as the source of the great evolutionary purpose which the world discloses. Cosmic Teleology spells a corresponding transcendent Personality. Do the facts warrant or necessitate such tremendous assumptions? Would it not rather seem that the whole basis of this reasoning is unsound and mere speculation? In all the previous cases of wholes we have nowhere been able to argue from the parts to the whole. Compared to its parts, the whole constituted by them is something quite different, something creatively new, as we have seen. Creative Evolution synthesises from the parts a new entity not only different from them but quite transcending them. That is the essence of a whole. It is always transcendent, to its parts, and its character cannot be inferred from the characters of its parts. Now the above reasoning, by which a supra-mundane Mind or Personality is reached, ignores this fact. Such a “ Personality ” would be creatively new and unlike the wholes which we know and which would constitute its parts. It would be as different at least from human Personality as this again is from mere organism. To call such a new Transcendent Whole by the same name as human Personality would be mere anthropomorphism. There is universal agreement with the well-known argument of Kant, that from the facts of Nature no inference Of God is justified. The belief in the Divine Being rests, and necessarily must rest, on quite different grounds, as a God whose concept is deduced from natural process is not a being whom the human soul can worship. From the facts of Evolution no inference to a transcendent Mind is justified, as that would make the whole still of the same character and order as its parts; which would be absurd, as Euclid says. From the facts neither an organism nor a Mind of Nature can strictly be inferred; still less a Personality constituted by both. It may be that the universe is a whole in the making. That has been suggested as a possible view. But as yet no such whole can be discerned or inferred, either in its lower organic or its higher personal form. The World-Soul is a poetic metaphor and probably no more.

Nor is it necessary to make these far-reaching assumptions. There is indeed a great trend in Evolution, but it would be wrong and a misnomer to call that trend a purpose, and worse to invent a Mind to which to refer that purpose. There is something organic and holistic in Nature which shapes her ends and directs her courses. Without forming an organism or a mind the totality of wholes which compose Nature develops an organic field which is sufficient to control her creative movement. As a physical field has its lines of force, so the organic field of Nature, which results from the creative interpenetration of all fields of wholes composing her, has its own structural curves of progress. In human society we see how the social field or atmosphere becomes a system of control, a moulding influence to which all incoming members are subject. The individual in society is born into a vast network of controls, and from birth to death he never escapes its subtle toils. The holistic organic field of Nature exercises a similar subtle moulding, controlling influence in respect of the general trend of organic advance. That trend is not random or accidental or free to move in all directions; it is controlled, it has the general character of uniform direction under the influence of the organic or holistic field of Nature.

And there is more. Behind the evolutionary movement and the holistic field of Nature is the inner pervasive feature of Holism itself, seen in the wholes and in the variations which creatively arise from them. We have seen in Chapter VIII that these variations are not accidental or haphazard, but the controlled, regulated expression of the inner holistic development of organisms as wholes There is Selection, and thus direction and, control, right through the entire forward movement, not only in the origin of variations but also at the various subsequent stages of their “selection,” internal and external. This organic holistic control of direction, this inner trend of the evolutionary process, is really all that is meant by the metaphor of Purpose or Teleology as applied to Nature or Evolution. To infer more is in effect to make the mistake of spiritual Idealism and to apply later human categories to the earlier phases of the evolutionary process.

Thus it is that when we speak of Nature or the Universe as a Whole or The Whole, we merely mean Nature or the Universe considered as organic, or in its organic or holistic aspects. We do not mean that either is a real whole in the sense defined in this work. We have seen that the creative intensified Field of Nature, consisting of all physical organic and personal wholes in their close interactions and mutual influences, is itself of an organic or holistic character. That Field is the source of the grand Ecology of the universe. It is the environment, the Society--vital, friendly, educative, creative--of all wholes and’ all souls. It is not a mere figure of speech or figment of the imagination, but a reality with profound influences of its own on all wholes and their destiny. It is the οἶκος, the Home of all the family of the universe, with something profoundly intimate and friendly in its atmosphere. In this Home of Wholes and Souls the creative tasks of Holism are carried forward. Without idealising it unduly we yet feel that it is very near and dear to us, and in spite of all antagonisms and troubles we come in the end to feel that this is a friendly universe. Its deepest tendencies are helpful to what is best in us, and our highest aspirations are but its inspiration. Thus behind our striving in our human advance are in the last resort the entire weight and momentum and the inmost nature and trend of the universe.

I have now reached the end of my argument. The reflections embodied in this work lie far removed from the busy and exciting scenes in which most of my life has been spent; and yet both of them tend toward the same general conclusions. It has been my lot to have passed many of the years of my life amid the conflicts of men, in their wars and their council chambers. Everywhere I have seen men search and struggle for the Good with grim determination and earnestness, and with a sincerity of purpose which only added to the poignancy of the strife. But we are still far, very far, from the goal to which Holism points. The Great War--with its infinite loss and suffering, its. toll of untold lives, the shattering of great States and almost of civilisation, the fearful waste of goodwill and sincere human ideals which followed the close of that vast tragedy --has been proof enough for our day and generation that we are yet far off the attainment of the ideal of a really Holistic world. But everywhere too I have seen that it was at bottom a struggle for the Good, a blind striving towards human betterment; that blindly, and through blinding mists of passions and illusions, men are yet sincerely, earnestly groping towards the light, towards the ideal of a better, more secure life for themselves and for their fellows. Thus the League of Nations, the chief constructive outcome of the Great War, is but the expression of the deeply-felt aspiration towards a more’ stable holistic human society. And the faith has been strengthened in me that what has here been called Holism is at work even in the conflicts and confusions of men; that in -spite of all appearances to the contrary, eventual victory is serenely and securely waiting, and that the immeasurable sacrifices have not been in vain. The groaning and travailing of the universe is never aimless or resultless. Its profound labours mean new creation, the slow, painful birth of wholes, of new and higher wholes, and the slow but steady realisation of the Good which all the wholes of the universe in their various grades dimly yearn and strive for. It is the nature of the universe to strive for and slowly, but in ever-increasing measure, to attain wholeness, fullness, blessedness. The real defeat for men as for other grades of the universe would be to ease the pain by a cessation of effort, to cease from striving towards the Good. The holistic nisus which rises like a living fountain from the very depths of the universe is the guarantee that failure does not await us, that the ideals of Well-being, of Truth, Beauty and Goodness are firmly grounded in the nature of things, and will not eventually be endangered or lost. Wholeness, healing, holiness--all expressions and ideas springing from the same root in language as in experience-- lie on the rugged upward path of the universe, and are secure of attainment--in part here and now, and eventually more fully and truly. The rise and self-perfection of wholes in the Whole is the slow but unerring process and goal of this Holistic universe.

1 Doncaster: Introduction to Study of Cytology, pp. 3-4

2 Professor Lloyd Morgan has made the creative or emergent character of Evolution the theme of his book on Emergent Evolution and it has been suggested to me that I should explain my relation to it. The fact is that my views had a different origin from his, and that they had been matured and the whole of this book written before I saw his interesting and suggestive volume. The result is that, in spite of many surprising similarities of thought, there remains an essential diversity in our themes as well as in our emphasis even on those matters on which we apparently agree.’ To him emergence of the new in the evolution of the universe is the essential fact; to me there is something more fundamental--the character of wholeness, the tendency to wholes, ever more intensive and effective wholes, which is basic to the universe, and of which emergence or creativeness is but one feature, however important it Is in other respects. Hence he lays all the emphasis on the feature of emergence, while I stress wholes or Holism as the real feature, from which emergence and all the rest follow. To me the holistic aspect of the universe is fundamental, and appears to be the key position both for the science and the philosophy of the future.

3 See pp. 132-4
